Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of Mr. Wickham being present had never occurred to Till Elizabeth.

The certainty of meeting Mr. Wickham had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed Till Elizabeth.

Till Elizabeth had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of Mr. Wickham heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening.

This part of Mr. Wickham intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth; and, as it assured Elizabeth that Mr. Darcy was not less answerable for Mr. Wickham's absence than if Elizabeth first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that Elizabeth could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries which Mr. Wickham directly afterwards approached to make.

Elizabeth was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which Elizabeth could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked Elizabeth.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of Elizabeth own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on Elizabeth spirits; and, having told all Elizabeth griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom Elizabeth had not seen for a week, Elizabeth was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of Elizabeth cousin, and to point him out to Elizabeth particular notice.

Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave Elizabeth all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give.

The moment of Elizabeth release from him was ecstasy.

Elizabeth danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that him was universally liked.

When The two first dances were over, Elizabeth returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with Elizabeth, when Elizabeth found Elizabeth suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took Elizabeth so much by surprise in him application for Elizabeth hand, that, without knowing what Elizabeth did, Elizabeth accepted him.

him walked away again immediately, and Elizabeth was left to fret over Elizabeth

Charlotte tried to console Elizabeth. '

Both,' replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of Both minds.

he made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked Elizabeth if Elizabeth and Elizabeth sisters did not very often walk to Meryton.

Elizabeth answered in the affirmative ; and, unable to resist the temptation, added, When you met Both there the other day, Both had just been forming a new acquaintance.'

A deeper shade of hauteur said not a word ; and Elizabeth, though blaming Elizabeth for Elizabeth own weakness, could not go on.

said,- Mr. Wickham has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,' replied Elizabeth, with emphasis, and in a manner which said,- Mr. Wickham is likely to suffer from all said,- Mr. Wickham life.'

"My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe, that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom-provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained.

