He met her at the parlour - door, and hardly asking her how she did, in the natural key of his voice, sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father, Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning ?
There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly.
To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma.
Something really important seemed announced by his looks; but, as her friend was well, she endeavoured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father, that she would take her walk now, she and Mr. Weston were soon out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls.
Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrong in this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his having many, very many, good qualities; and Good God !
cried Emma, not attending to her.
Do not be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon.
Break it to me, cried Emma, standing still with terror.
He knew nothing about it, Emma.
Till yesterday, I know he said he was in the dark as to her plans.
They burst on him, I do not know how, but by some letter or message and it was the discovery of what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined him to come forward at once, own it all to his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short, put an end to the miserable state of concealment that had been carrying on so long.
Emma began to listen better.
Upon my word, Emma.
Emma's courage returned, and she walked on.
In short, my dear Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it.
thought Emma, he would have done as much for Harriet.
Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort.
She asked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, and that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money concern something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the circumstances of the family, something which the late event at Richmond had brought forward.
Her fancy was very active.
This, though very undesirable, would be no matter of agony to her.
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush.
said she, as they proceeded speaking more to assist Mr. Weston in keeping his secret, than with any other view.
His wife gave him a look which invited him in; and, while he was coming round, added, Now, dearest Emma, let me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease, and incline him to be satisfied with the match.
Let us make the best of it and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly said in her favour.
And Emma distinctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room, I have been as good as my word.
She has not the least idea.
Mrs. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation, that Emma's uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone, she eagerly said, What is it my dear friend ?
cried Emma feelingly.
Can not you, my dear Emma can not you form a guess as to what you are to hear ?
It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly; ( resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up. )
His companions suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objections; and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he had talked it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was become perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank could possibly have done.
He came to speak to his father on a subject, to announce an attachment She stopped to breathe.
Emma thought first of herself, and then of Harriet.
What will you say, Emma what will any body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged; nay, that they have been long engaged !
Emma even jumped with surprize; and, horror - struck, exclaimed, Jane Fairfax !
Not a creature knowing it but themselves neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.
Emma scarcely heard what was said.
Her mind was divided between two ideas her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; and poor Harriet; and for some time she could only exclaim, and require confirmation, repeated confirmation.
It has hurt me, Emma, very much.
Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, I will not pretend not to understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assured that no such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you are apprehensive of.
That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my present perfect indifference, she continued, I will farther tell you, that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I did like him, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him nay, was attached and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder.