Emma was extremely confused.
She could not endure to give him the true explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.
she cried in evident embarrassment, it all meant nothing; a mere joke among ourselves.
He began to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuit of Emma.
That Emma was his object appeared indisputable.
He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not.
But while so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet, Mr. Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax.
He could not understand it; but there were symptoms of intelligence between them he thought so at least symptoms of admiration on his side, which, having once observed, he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning, however he might wish to escape any of Emma's errors of imagination.
She was not present when the suspicion first arose.
She would rather busy herself about any thing than speak.
Emma's confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed to declare her affection engaged.
He owed it to her, to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he joined them; and, on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who, like themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early, as the weather threatened rain; Mr. and Mrs. Weston and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had accidentally met.
They all united; and, on reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him.
Emma, you are a great dreamer, I think ?
Emma was out of hearing.
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of Mr. Weston's hint.
The dream must be borne with, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield, and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and persuade her father to use, instead of the small - sized Pembroke, on which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded.
Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the table was quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves.
She gave a slight glance round the table, and applied herself to it.
Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite to them and Mr. Knightley so placed as to see them all; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as little apparent observation.
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and buried from sight, she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across, for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager after every fresh word, and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell to work.
He saw a short word prepared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and demure.
He saw that Emma had soon made it out, and found it highly entertaining, though it was something which she judged it proper to appear to censure; for she said, Nonsense !
and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth.
This gallant young man, who seemed to love without feeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance, directly handed over the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of sedate civility entreated her to study it.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his observations, he must yes, he certainly must, as a friend an anxious friend give Emma some hint, ask her some question.
He could not see her in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her.
Pray, Emma, said he, may I ask in what lay the great amusement, the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax ?