With all the eagerness which such a transition gives, Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible.
Never had the exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive to her.
She longed for the serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr. Perry's coming in soon after dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery.
There, with spirits freshened, and thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when she saw Mr. Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming towards her.
Emma, that I fear is a word No, I have no wish Stay, yes, why should I hesitate ?
She had been thinking of him the moment before, as unquestionably sixteen miles distant.
Emma, I accept your offer Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refer myself to you as a friend.
She must be collected and calm.
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression of his eyes overpowered her.
My dearest Emma, said he, for dearest you will always be, whatever the event of this hour's conversation, my dearest, most beloved Emma tell me at once.
She asked after their mutual friends; they were all well.
She could really say nothing.
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment.
I can not make speeches, Emma : he soon resumed; and in a tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerably convincing.
He meant to walk with her, she found.
She thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it, suggested by her fears, was, that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his brother, and was pained by the manner in which they had been received.
Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them.
She thought he was often looking at her, and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her to give.
Perhaps he wanted to speak to her, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watching for encouragement to begin.
While he spoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderful velocity of thought, had been able and yet without losing a word to catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that Harriet's hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as complete a delusion as any of her own that Harriet was nothing; that she was every thing herself; that what she had been saying relative to Harriet had been all taken as the language of her own feelings; and that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her discouragement, had been all received as discouragement from herself.
It was all the service she could now render her poor friend; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the most worthy of the two or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive, because he could not marry them both, Emma had it not.
She felt for Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run mad, opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her brain.
cried Emma, turning her glowing cheeks towards him; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he might have called at Mrs. Goddard's in his way.
Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little more composure, You probably have been less surprized than any of us, for you have had your suspicions.
For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious of having excited any particular interest, till she found her arm drawn within his, and pressed against his heart, and heard him thus saying, in a tone of great sensibility, speaking low, Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.
Mr. Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart than she possessed, or a heart more disposed to accept of his.
Her arm was pressed again, as he added, in a more broken and subdued accent, The feelings of the warmest friendship Indignation Abominable scoundrel !
He had followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it.
He had come, in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill's engagement, with no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she allowed him an opening, to soothe or to counsel her.
I am sorry for her.
She deserves a better fate.
Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied, You are very kind but you are mistaken and I must set you right.
The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank Churchill, of her having a heart completely disengaged from him, had given birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection himself; but it had been no present hope he had only, in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her.
Emma !
cried he, looking eagerly at her, are you, indeed ?
Her change was equal.
He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of Frank Churchill, from about the same period, one sentiment having probably enlightened him as to the other.
There was too much domestic happiness in his brother's house; woman wore too amiable a form in it; Isabella was too much like Emma differing only in those striking inferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancy before him, for much to have been done, even had his time been longer.
Then, with the gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel, having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma, was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could stay no longer.
He had ridden home through the rain; and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults, bore the discovery.
He had found her agitated and low.
He heard her declare that she had never loved him.
She was his own Emma, by hand and word, when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow.
And I do envy him, Emma.
Emma could say no more.
Emma, I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid the next moment.
then, do n't speak it, do n't speak it, she eagerly cried.
Emma could not bear to give him pain.
He was wishing to confide in her perhaps to consult her; cost her what it would, she would listen.
She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might give just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him his own independence, relieve him from that state of indecision, which must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his.
And, after proceeding a few steps, she added I stopped you ungraciously, just now, Mr. Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you pain.