Her next beginning was, In one respect, perhaps, Mr. Elton's manners are superior to Mr. Knightley's or Mr. Weston 's.
Quick and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging, and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance increased, so did their satisfaction in each other.
As a walking companion, Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her.
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw no alarming symptoms of love.
The young man had been the first admirer, but she trusted there was no other hold, and that there would be no serious difficulty, on Harriet's side, to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own.
Emma was not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few yards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with Mr. Robert Martin.
thought Emma.
His appearance was very neat, and he looked like a sensible young man, but his person had no other advantage; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen, she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet's inclination.
Mr. Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer out of Harriet's head.
He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient income; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known to have some independent property; and she thought very highly of him as a good - humoured, well - meaning, respectable young man, without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked but she could never believe that in the same situation she should not have discovered the truth.
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, was foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet's there could be little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy.
I wonder he did not remember the book was all Harriet's answer, and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be safely left to itself.
She, therefore, said no more for some time.