It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it one morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her, when Mr. Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by.
said she, quickly, looking up in his face.
He paused a moment, again smiling, with his eyes fixed on her face.
Emma was extremely glad to see him — but there was a degree of confusion — a number of embarrassing recollections on each side.
They met readily and smiling, but with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having all sat down again, there was for some time such a blank in the circle, that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had long felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing him with Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure.
Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared — and her eyes, in eager gaze, said, No, this is impossible !
Is not she looking well ?
You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.
— Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing.
I have some hope, resumed he, of my uncle's being persuaded to pay a visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her.
When the Campbells are returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, I trust, till we may carry her northward.
— But now, I am at such a distance from her — is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse ?
Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gay thought, he cried, Ah !
— She coloured and laughed.
Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in the same style; but his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane, and his next words were, Did you ever see such a skin ?
— Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply.
To speak, she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness.
She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad.
Her silence disturbed him; and after observing her a little while, he added, Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make you unhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected.
— When we first began to talk of her.
— How could I dare — But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not help saying, I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, you had very great amusement in tricking us all.
His rank in society I would alter if I could, which is saying a great deal I assure you, Emma.
He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself not to smile too broadly — she did — cheerfully answering, You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match.
Emma could not help laughing as she answered, Upon my word, I believe you know her quite as well as I do.
— But, Mr. Knightley, are you perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright accepted him.
I could suppose she might in time — but can she already ?
The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Knightley and Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma's feelings, and so strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet's side, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such emphasis, No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin, that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove, in some measure, premature.
said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke, to catch Miss Fairfax's eye.
Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane's countenance that she too was really hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.
cried Emma, shaking her head.
He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; but Emma's feelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leaving Randalls, and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men, she felt, that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill, and really regarding him as she did with friendship, she had never been more sensible of Mr. Knightley's high superiority of character.