XV Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill opinion of Mrs. Elton.
Her observation had been pretty correct.
He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful and in a manner which shewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said, So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax ?
Her feelings altered towards Emma.
Offended, probably, by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and though the effect was agreeable, the ill - will which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma's dislike.
Her manners, too and Mr. Elton 's, were unpleasant towards Harriet.
The result of his reverie was, No, Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize.
Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet's cure; but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much.
I never had a thought of her in that way, I assure you.
Well, said she, and you soon silenced Mr. Cole, I suppose ?
Before Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about the third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs. Elton's knight - errantry on the subject.
I can not think there is any danger of it, was Emma's calm answer and when you are better acquainted with Miss Fairfax's situation and understand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell, I have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.
Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of not being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last.
thought Emma.
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again to any so exclusively addressed to herself so disgustingly decorated with a dear Miss Woodhouse.
Emma's only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs. Elton as she seemed to do.
She must be under some sort of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself.
She is not to be with the Dixons.
But why must she consent to be with the Eltons ?
We can not suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, my dear Emma but it is better than being always at home.
Her aunt is a good creature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome.
We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste for what she goes to.
But ( with a reproachful smile at Emma ) she receives attentions from Mrs. Elton, which nobody else pays her.
Emma felt that Mrs. Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she was herself struck by his warmth.
Little Henry was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what else to say.
Yes, he replied, any body may know how highly I think of her.
Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Weston, and did not herself know what to think.
Miss Fairfax, I dare say, would not have me if I were to ask her and I am very sure I shall never ask her.
Emma returned her friend's pressure with interest; and was pleased enough to exclaim, You are not vain, Mr. Knightley.