For some weeks past she had been spending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have a bed - room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every respect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible just at present.
She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or two to Mrs. Goddard 's, but it was then to be settled that she should return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some days.
While she was gone, Mr. Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr. Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse, who had previously made up his mind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and was induced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of his own civility, to leave Mr. Knightley for that purpose.
Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take Emma's advice and go out for a quarter of an hour.
You have been no friend to Harriet Smith, Emma.
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far, if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him.
Emma will be happy to entertain you.
It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this assertion; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again.
He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before.
Her character depends upon those she is with; but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman.
Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have, is almost enough to make me think so too.
Come, said he, you are anxious for a compliment, so I will tell you that you have improved her.
You have cured her of her school - girl's giggle; she really does you credit.
cried she playfully.
You are expecting her again, you say, this morning ?
She has been gone longer already than she intended.
Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps.
Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore said nothing.
He presently added, with a smile, I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that I have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of something to her advantage.
I can think of but one thing Who is in love with her ?
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Elton's having dropt a hint.
Mr. Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew Mr. Elton looked up to him.
Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but was really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone.
She did not repent what she had done; she still thought herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general, which made her dislike having it so loudly against her; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry state, was very disagreeable.
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt on Emma's side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer.
Emma laughed and disclaimed.
Was not she the whole day with you ?
This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr. Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he stood up, in tall indignation, and said, Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her.
He felt the disappointment of the young man, and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction he had given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair, was provoking him exceedingly.
Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more indistinctness in the causes of her 's, than in his.
to be sure, cried Emma, it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage.
She did not always feel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that her opinions were right and her adversary's wrong, as Mr. Knightley.
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her.
She was not so materially cast down, however, but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives.
Emma, this is your doing.
Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you.
I remember saying to myself, ' Even Emma, with all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a good match. '
I can not help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say any such thing.
Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own !