XII One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr. Weston's confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight.
The preparations must take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on, and for a few days they must be planning, proceeding and hoping in uncertainty at the risk in her opinion, the great risk, of its being all in vain.
He could not say that he was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would have contradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily, that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others, and with considerable kindness added, You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really out of luck; you are very much out of luck !
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honest regret in this woeful change; but when they did meet, her composure was odious.
All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain of her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr. Knightley's provoking indifference about it.
Emma looked graciously.
To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply, than, Very well.
This wretched note was the finale of Emma's breakfast.
He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it might have ended, if his father had not made his appearance ?
and she and her partner the happiest !
Her father's feelings were quite distinct.
He thought principally of Mrs. Churchill's illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and as for the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but they would all be safer at home.
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him.
This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry.
He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma was convinced that it had been so.
Short had been the notice short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it too much.
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs. Weston, instantly.