No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma.
Mr. Weston had been so very earnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves, for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons came, that she could not refuse him, and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man's company.
She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before them.
They all walked about together, to see that every thing was as it should be; and within a few minutes were joined by the contents of another carriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first, without great surprize.
she was going to exclaim; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends, who were coming, like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr. Weston's judgment; and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins, who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr. Weston depended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes, was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity.
She liked his open manners, but a little less of open - heartedness would have made him a higher character.
She could fancy such a man.
Emma found that it was not Mr. Weston's fault that the number of privy councillors was not yet larger.
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little way behind her.
Emma longed to know what Frank's first opinion of Mrs. Elton might be; how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles of graciousness.
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear more; and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till another suspension brought Mrs. Elton's tones again distinctly forward.
said Emma in a whisper.
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Knightley till after supper; but, when they were all in the ballroom again, her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked.
He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving no answer, added, She ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he may be.
Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour.
To that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma, that you did want him to marry Harriet.
He had met with them in a little perplexity, which must be laid before Emma.
It had just occurred to Mrs. Weston that Mrs. Elton must be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it; which interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction.
Her gestures and movements might be understood by any one who looked on like Emma; but her words, every body's words, were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came in talking, and had not finished her speech under many minutes after her being admitted into the circle at the fire.
Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.
Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most perfect approbation of and it then appeared that Mrs. Weston was wanting him to dance with Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.
I did, replied Emma, and they can not forgive me.
Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton, though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her.
In spite of this little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.
She was more disturbed by Mr. Knightley's not dancing than by any thing else.
Emma was extremely gratified.
His tall, firm, upright figure, among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men, was such as Emma felt must draw every body's eyes; and, excepting her own partner, there was not one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him.
Come Emma, set your companions the example.
Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him to smile; but in general he was looking grave.
She wished he could love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchill better.
He seemed often observing her.
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feel afraid.
There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner.
That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done, was indubitable.
There was one, however, which Emma thought something of.
But Emma's wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr. Elton sauntering about.
Emma saw it.
She was not yet dancing; she was working her way up from the bottom, and had therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning her head a little she saw it all.
When she was half - way up the set, the whole group were exactly behind her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch; but Mr. Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then took place between him and Mrs. Weston; and she perceived that his wife, who was standing immediately above her, was not only listening also, but even encouraging him by significant glances.
She looked round for a moment; he had joined Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and was arranging himself for settled conversation, while smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife.
Must not compliment, I know ( eyeing Emma most complacently ) that would be rude but upon my word, Miss Woodhouse, you do look how do you like Jane's hair ?
Mr. Elton had retreated into the card - room, looking ( Emma trusted ) very foolish.
She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife, though growing very like her; she spoke some of her feelings, by observing audibly to her partner, Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith !