She seemed bent on giving no real insight into Mr. Dixon's character, or her own value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match.
It did her no service however.
Her caution was thrown away.
Emma saw its artifice, and returned to her first surmises.
There probably was something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr. Dixon, perhaps, had been very near changing one friend for the other, or been fixed only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds.
It was known that they were a little acquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was.
She believed he was reckoned a very fine young man.
She believed every body found his manners pleasing.
Emma could not forgive her.
Emma was sorry; to have to pay civilities to a person she did not like through three long months !
to be always doing more than she wished, and less than she ought !
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficult question to answer; Mr. Knightley had once told her it was because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which she wanted to be thought herself; and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time, there were moments of self - examination in which her conscience could not quite acquit her.
Emma could not but feel all this; and then, her face her features there was more beauty in them altogether than she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was very pleasing beauty.
Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye - lashes and eyebrows, had never been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been used to cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom.
It was a style of beauty, of which elegance was the reigning character, and as such, she must, in honour, by all her principles, admire it : elegance, which, whether of person or of mind, she saw so little in Highbury.
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice, and was determining that she would dislike her no longer.
Emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seduced Mr. Dixon's actions from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her imagination had suggested at first.
If it were love, it might be simple, single, successless love on her side alone.
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, while a sharer of his conversation with her friend; and from the best, the purest of motives, might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.
Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings, as made her look around in walking home, and lament that Highbury afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence; nobody that she could wish to scheme about for her.
They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off in higher style her own very superior performance.
She was, besides, which was the worst of all, so cold, so cautious !
There was no getting at her real opinion.
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed determined to hazard nothing.
She was disgustingly, was suspiciously reserved.
If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing.