III Emma could not forgive her; but as neither provocation nor resentment were discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had been of the party, and had seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he was expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on business with Mr. Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room, but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma.
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement.
I am sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening pleasant, Emma.
I was glad you made her play so much, for having no instrument at her grandmother 's, it must have been a real indulgence.
No, my dear, said her father instantly; that I am sure you are not.
My dear Emma, said he, moving from his chair into one close by her, you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasant evening.
She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she had Emma.
True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.
Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question She is a sort of elegant creature that one can not keep one's eyes from.
I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my heart.
and I have often wished but it is so little one can venture to do small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon Now we have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg; it is very small and delicate Hartfield pork is not like any other pork but still it is pork and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are fried, without the smallest grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear roast pork I think we had better send the leg do not you think so, my dear ?
Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry and to marry strangers too and the other half she could give to her own view of the subject.
It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece of news, as proving that Mr. Elton could not have suffered long; but she was sorry for Harriet : Harriet must feel it and all that she could hope was, by giving the first information herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly from others.
and upon its beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be detaining her at Mrs. Goddard 's, and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.
As the blow was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had to tell.
Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she was so completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start, and a little blush, at the sound.
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in her power.
She was obliged to stop and think.
She was not thoroughly comfortable herself.
said Emma, as soon as she could speak.
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting.
cried Emma.
Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings, Emma said, You are silent, Miss Fairfax but I hope you mean to take an interest in this news.