She touched she admitted she acknowledged the whole truth.
Those were the words; in them lay the tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted the real misery of the business to her.
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself very ill in many ways, but it was not so much his behaviour as her own, which made her so angry with him.
It was the scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet's account, that gave the deepest hue to his offence.
Some portion of respect for herself, however, in spite of all these demerits some concern for her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice by Harriet ( there would be no need of compassion to the girl who believed herself loved by Mr. Knightley but justice required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now, ) gave Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness, with even apparent kindness.
For her own advantage indeed, it was fit that the utmost extent of Harriet's hopes should be enquired into; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so voluntarily formed and maintained or to deserve to be slighted by the person, whose counsels had never led her right.
Emma's tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were better concealed than Harriet 's, but they were not less.
Emma knew that he had, on that occasion, found her much superior to his expectation.
Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted.
Emma knew it to have been very much the case.
She had often observed the change, to almost the same extent.
Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet.
Emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first.
Much that lived in Harriet's memory, many little particulars of the notice she had received from him, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to another, a compliment implied, a preference inferred, had been unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma.
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour's relation, and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them, had passed undiscerned by her who now heard them; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned, the two of strongest promise to Harriet, were not without some degree of witness from Emma herself.
The first, was his walking with her apart from the others, in the lime - walk at Donwell, where they had been walking some time before Emma came, and he had taken pains ( as she was convinced ) to draw her from the rest to himself and at first, he had talked to her in a more particular way than he had ever done before, in a very particular way indeed !
Emma had promised; but still Harriet must be excepted.
But as soon as she ( Miss Woodhouse ) appeared likely to join them, he changed the subject, and began talking about farming : The second, was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hour before Emma came back from her visit, the very last morning of his being at Hartfield though, when he first came in, he had said that he could not stay five minutes and his having told her, during their conversation, that though he must go to London, it was very much against his inclination that he left home at all, which was much more ( as Emma felt ) than he had acknowledged to her.
replied Emma, unable to guess, by look or voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her father's footsteps.
said Emma, still perplexed.
She could not compose herself Mr. Woodhouse would be alarmed she had better go; with most ready encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through another door and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous burst of Emma's feelings : Oh God !
that I had never seen her !
The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for her thoughts.
It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet's behaviour was so extremely odd, that Emma did not know how to understand it.
Her character appeared absolutely changed.
She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, or disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery.
Emma looked at her, quite unable to speak.
She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours.
Every moment had brought a fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to her.
You ( blushing as she spoke ) who can see into every body's heart; but nobody else Upon my word, said Emma, I begin to doubt my having any such talent.
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself, and living under !
The blunders, the blindness of her own head and heart !
she sat still, she walked about, she tried her own room, she tried the shrubbery in every place, every posture, she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she was wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness.
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first endeavour.
To that point went every leisure moment which her father's claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.
How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling declared him now to be ?
When had he succeeded to that place in her affection, which Frank Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied ?
She looked back; she compared the two compared them, as they had always stood in her estimation, from the time of the latter's becoming known to her and as they must at any time have been compared by her, had it oh !
had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute the comparison.
She saw that there never had been a time when she did not consider Mr. Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear.
She saw, that in persuading herself, in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart and, in short, that she had never really cared for Frank Churchill at all !
This was the knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she reached; and without being long in reaching it.
She was most sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed to her her affection for Mr. Knightley.
cried Emma, after a moment's pause What do you mean ?
Every other part of her mind was disgusting.
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of every body's feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange every body's destiny.
She was proved to have been universally mistaken; and she had not quite done nothing for she had done mischief.
She had brought evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too much feared, on Mr. Knightley.
She could not speak another word.
Her voice was lost; and she sat down, waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma 's.
Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place, on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning; for his attachment, she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet 's; and even were this not the case, he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly.
I know we agreed never to name him but considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should not have thought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other person.
It was horrible to Emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles, the sneers, the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification and disdain of his brother, the thousand inconveniences to himself.
cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely Let us understand each other now, without the possibility of farther mistake.
cried Emma, this has been a most unfortunate most deplorable mistake !
At least, however, I can not be worse off than I should have been, if the other had been the person; and now it is possible She paused a few moments.
Emma could not speak.
Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating, in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
A few minutes were sufficient for making her acquainted with her own heart.