Emma must do Harriet good : and by supplying her with a new object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good.
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr. Knightley.
We were speaking of it only yesterday, and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma, that there should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with.
She is not the superior young woman which Emma's friend ought to be.
But on the other hand, as Emma wants to see her better informed, it will be an inducement to her to read more herself.
She means it, I know.
Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old.
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing - up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through and very good lists they were very well chosen, and very neatly arranged sometimes alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule.
The list she drew up when only fourteen I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit, that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now.
But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma.
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding.
I dare say, replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, that I thought so then; but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma's omitting to do any thing I wished.
Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest of her family.
At ten years old, she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen.
She was always quick and assured : Isabella slow and diffident.
And ever since she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all.
In her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her.
She inherits her mother's talents, and must have been under subjection to her.
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise; but you were receiving a very good education from her, on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and doing as you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife, I should certainly have named Miss Taylor.
I do not pretend to Emma's genius for foretelling and guessing.
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have.
She knows nothing herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing.
She is a flatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned.
Her ignorance is hourly flattery.
How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself, while Harriet is presenting such a delightful inferiority ?
I am much mistaken if Emma's doctrines give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in life.
I either depend more upon Emma's good sense than you do, or am more anxious for her present comfort; for I can not lament the acquaintance.
How well she looked last night !
you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you ?
Very well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma's being pretty.
Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect beauty than Emma altogether face and figure ?
There is health, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, her glance.
One hears sometimes of a child being ' the picture of health; ' now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of grown - up health.
She is loveliness itself.
Mr. Knightley, is not she ?
I think her all you describe.
I love to look at her; and I will add this praise, that I do not think her personally vain.
Considering how very handsome she is, she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity lies another way.
With all dear Emma's little faults, she is an excellent creature.
No, no; she has qualities which may be trusted; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make no lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the right a hundred times.
Emma shall be an angel, and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella.
John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection, and Isabella always thinks as he does; except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children.
I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind; but excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if I take the liberty ( I consider myself, you know, as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma's mother might have had ) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good can arise from Harriet Smith's intimacy being made a matter of much discussion among you.
Pray excuse me; but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy, it can not be expected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly approves the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself.
I have a very sincere interest in Emma.
There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one feels for Emma.
I wonder what will become of her !
I should like to see Emma in love, and in some doubt of a return; it would do her good.
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her; and she goes so seldom from home.
I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma, though I mean no slight to the state, I assure you.
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr. Weston's on the subject, as much as possible.