XVI It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting.
Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed, without reproaches, or apparent sense of ill - usage; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of resentment, a something bordering on it in her style, which increased the desirableness of their being separate.
— It might be only her own consciousness; but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke.
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella's invitation; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without resorting to invention.
— When it was thus settled on her sister's side, Emma proposed it to her friend, and found her very persuadable.
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley's visits; now she could talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much might at that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard 's, or in London, made perhaps an unreasonable difference in Emma's sensations; but she could not think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment, which must be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied.
— Emma had never seen her look so well, so lovely, so engaging.
There was consciousness, animation, and warmth; there was every thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted.
— She came forward with an offered hand; and said, in a low, but very feeling tone, This is most kind, indeed !
Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words, if the sound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the sitting - room had not checked her, and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her congratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of the hand.
Emma could have wished Mrs. Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every body; and as Mrs. Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped the rencontre would do them no harm.
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs. Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old lady's replies, she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant nods, We can finish this some other time, you know.
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary, indeed, and that she had not a syllable to say for him.
Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly.
In all probability she was at this very time waited for there; and Mr. Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr. Elton, if not towards William Larkins.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of, to say, It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility.
And again, on Emma's merely turning her head to look at Mrs. Bates's knitting, she added, in a half whisper, I mentioned no names, you will observe.
Emma could not doubt.
you are too scrupulous, indeed you are, cried Emma warmly, and taking her hand.
— And when Mrs. Bates was saying something to Emma, whispered farther, We do not say a word of any assistance that Perry might have; not a word of a certain young physician from Windsor.
— And from her great, her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs. Elton for being there, Emma guessed that there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which was now graciously overcome.
And putting up her hand to screen her words from Emma — A congratulatory visit, you know.
Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, Is Mr. Elton gone on foot to Donwell ?
said Emma.