Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at Hartfield for the Eltons.
They must not do less than others, or she should be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful resentment.
After Emma had talked about it for ten minutes, Mr. Woodhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself, with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him.
Besides the Eltons, it must be the Westons and Mr. Knightley; so far it was all of course and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth : but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet's begging to be allowed to decline it.
It was precisely what Emma would have wished, had she deemed it possible enough for wishing.
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.
Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike.
I know what you mean but Emma's hand is the strongest.
I never saw any gentleman's handwriting Emma began, looking also at Mrs. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs. Weston was attending to some one else and the pause gave her time to reflect, Now, how am I going to introduce him ?
Mr. Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear and here would be a ninth and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come even to Hartfield for forty - eight hours without falling in with a dinner - party.
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, by representing that though he certainly would make them nine, yet he always said so little, that the increase of noise would be very immaterial.
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her instead of his brother.
The event was more favourable to Mr. Woodhouse than to Emma.
Mr. Woodhouse was quite at ease; and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate, removed the chief of even Emma's vexation.
If we were in the other room, said Emma, if I had my writing - desk, I am sure I could produce a specimen.
Jane's solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma.
She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any.
She suspected that it had; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear, and that it had not been in vain.
She thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual a glow both of complexion and spirits.
She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the expense of the Irish mails; it was at her tongue's end but she abstained.
She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane Fairfax's feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of the room, arm in arm, with an appearance of good - will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each.