Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she made a point of Harriet's going with her, that the worst of the business might be gone through as soon as possible.
The visit was of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one, beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being elegantly dressed, and very pleasing.
She did not really like her.
She would not be in a hurry to find fault, but she suspected that there was no elegance; ease, but not elegance.
She was almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there was too much ease.
Emma thought at least it would turn out so.
As for Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear but no, she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners.
There was a little hesitation in Emma's answer.
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Elton hardly waited for the affirmative before she went on.
When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind.
She could then see more and judge better.
Emma was quite at a loss.
The tone implied some old acquaintance and how could she possibly guess ?
They were off; and Emma could breathe.
was her immediate exclamation.
Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient for Mrs. Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.
Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment.
She had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double - dyed, and therefore only said in reply, When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think you have overrated Hartfield.
Emma was silenced.
Emma had done.
Her father was growing nervous, and could not understand her.
Her mind returned to Mrs. Elton's offences, and long, very long, did they occupy her.
It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite.
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs. Elton for what was called an introduction of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs. Elton's probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live !