Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs. Weston.
Emma only might be as nature prompted, and shew herself just as happy as she was.
To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons.
Mr. Weston was a great favourite, and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such unreserve, as to his wife; not any one, to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and understood, of being always interesting and always intelligible, the little affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father and herself.
She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs. Weston had not a lively concern; and half an hour's uninterrupted communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's visit might not afford, which certainly did not belong to the present half - hour; but the very sight of Mrs. Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was grateful to Emma, and she determined to think as little as possible of Mr. Elton's oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of saying, And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means certain.
Mr. Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to give the history of it, besides all the history of his own and Isabella's coming, and of Emma's being to follow, and had indeed just got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his daughter, when the others appeared, and Mrs. Weston, who had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn away and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma's project of forgetting Mr. Elton for a while made her rather sorry to find, when they had all taken their places, that he was close to her.
Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma's resolution of never marrying, there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr. Frank Churchill, which always interested her.
She had frequently thought especially since his father's marriage with Miss Taylor that if she were to marry, he was the very person to suit her in age, character and condition.
My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understand a bad one, or to lay down rules for it : you must let it go its own way.
Emma listened, and then coolly said, I shall not be satisfied, unless he comes.
She is an odd woman !
But I never allow myself to speak ill of her, on Frank's account; for I do believe her to be very fond of him.
I used to think she was not capable of being fond of any body, except herself : but she has always been kind to him ( in her way allowing for little whims and caprices, and expecting every thing to be as she likes ).
And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him, that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it to any body else, she has no more heart than a stone to people in general; and the devil of a temper.
Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs. Weston, very soon after their moving into the drawing - room : wishing her joy yet observing, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.
My Emma !