By degrees the girls came to spend the chief of the morning upstairs, at first only in working and talking, but after a few days, the remembrance of the said books grew so potent and stimulative that Fanny found it impossible not to try for books again.
There were none in her father ’s house; but wealth is luxurious and daring, and some of hers found its way to a circulating library.
She became a subscriber; amazed at being anything _ in propria persona _, amazed at her own doings in every way, to be a renter, a chuser of books !
And to be having any one ’s improvement in view in her choice !
Susan had read nothing, and Fanny longed to give her a share in her own first pleasures, and inspire a taste for the biography and poetry which she delighted in herself.
In this occupation she hoped, moreover, to bury some of the recollections of Mansfield, which were too apt to seize her mind if her fingers only were busy; and, especially at this time, hoped it might be useful in diverting her thoughts from pursuing Edmund to London, whither, on the authority of her aunt ’s last letter, she knew he was gone.
That a girl of fourteen, acting only on her own unassisted reason, should err in the method of reform, was not wonderful; and Fanny soon became more disposed to admire the natural light of the mind which could so early distinguish justly, than to censure severely the faults of conduct to which it led.
She had no doubt of what would ensue.
The promised notification was hanging over her head.
It was made, however, at last : a silver knife was bought for Betsey, and accepted with great delight, its newness giving it every advantage over the other that could be desired; Susan was established in the full possession of her own, Betsey handsomely declaring that now she had got one so much prettier herself, she should never want _ that _ again; and no reproach seemed conveyed to the equally satisfied mother, which Fanny had almost feared to be impossible.
By sitting together upstairs, they avoided a great deal of the disturbance of the house; Fanny had peace, and Susan learned to think it no misfortune to be quietly employed.
They sat without a fire; but that was a privation familiar even to Fanny, and she suffered the less because reminded by it of the East room.
In space, light, furniture, and prospect, there was nothing alike in the two apartments; and she often heaved a sigh at the remembrance of all her books and boxes, and various comforts there.