For I _ had _, Fanny, as I think my behaviour must have shewn, formed a very favourable opinion of you from the period of my return to England.
This was an order to be most joyfully obeyed; this was an act of kindness which Fanny felt at her heart.
To be spared from her aunt Norris ’s interminable reproaches !
he left her in a glow of gratitude.
I am aware that there has been sometimes, in some points, a misplaced distinction; but I think too well of you, Fanny, to suppose you will ever harbour resentment on that account.
She walked out directly, as her uncle recommended, and followed his advice throughout, as far as she could; did check her tears; did earnestly try to compose her spirits and strengthen her mind.
Here is a young man of sense, of character, of temper, of manners, and of fortune, exceedingly attached to you, and seeking your hand in the most handsome and disinterested way; and let me tell you, Fanny, that you may live eighteen years longer in the world without being addressed by a man of half Mr. Crawford ’s estate, or a tenth part of his merits.
She wished to prove to him that she did desire his comfort, and sought to regain his favour; and he had given her another strong motive for exertion, in keeping the whole affair from the knowledge of her aunts.
Not to excite suspicion by her look or manner was now an object worth attaining; and she felt equal to almost anything that might save her from her aunt Norris.
She was struck, quite struck, when, on returning from her walk and going into the East room again, the first thing which caught her eye was a fire lighted and burning.
it seemed too much; just at that time to be giving her such an indulgence was exciting even painful gratitude.
She wondered that Sir Thomas could have leisure to think of such a trifle again; but she soon found, from the voluntary information of the housemaid, who came in to attend it, that so it was to be every day.
But, Fanny, if your heart can acquit you of _ ingratitude _ — He ceased.
said she, in soliloquy.
She saw nothing more of her uncle, nor of her aunt Norris, till they met at dinner.