With a significant smile, which made Fanny quite hate him, he said, So !
How came she to think of asking Fanny ?
He seemed determined to be answered; and Fanny, averting her face, said, with a firmer tone than usual, As far as _ I _ am concerned, sir, I would not have delayed his return for a day.
She had never spoken so much at once to him in her life before, and never so angrily to any one; and when her speech was over, she trembled and blushed at her own daring.
He was surprised; but after a few moments ’ silent consideration of her, replied in a calmer, graver tone, and as if the candid result of conviction, I believe you are right.
And then turning the conversation, he would have engaged her on some other subject, but her answers were so shy and reluctant that he could not advance in any.
Very well, then, Fanny may go, Edmund.
The good news soon followed her.
As you please, ma’am, on that head; but I meant my father ’s opinion as to the _ propriety _ of the invitation ’s being accepted or not; and I think he will consider it a right thing by Mrs. Grant, as well as by Fanny, that being the _ first _ invitation it should be accepted.
Edmund knocked at her door in his way to his own.
Her story began; and Fanny immediately slipped out of the room; for to hear herself the subject of any discussion with her uncle was more than her nerves could bear.
She was anxious, she knew — more anxious perhaps than she ought to be — for what was it after all whether she went or staid ?
but if her uncle were to be a great while considering and deciding, and with very grave looks, and those grave looks directed to her, and at last decide against her, she might not be able to appear properly submissive and indifferent.
Her cause, meanwhile, went on well.
Mrs. Grant has asked Fanny to dinner.
Mrs. Norris had now so ingeniously done away all Mrs. Grant ’s part of the favour, that Fanny, who found herself expected to speak, could only say that she was very much obliged to her aunt Bertram for sparing her, and that she was endeavouring to put her aunt ’s evening work in such a state as to prevent her being missed.