He will make you happy, Fanny; I know he will make you happy; but you will make him everything.
Next to your happiness, Fanny, his has the first claim on me.
Drawing her arm within his.
She assented to it all rather by look than word.
Her spirits were low.
She spoke of you, Fanny, just as she ought.
She desires the connexion as warmly as your uncle or myself.
I should not have mentioned the subject, though very anxious to know her sentiments; but I had not been in the room five minutes before she began introducing it with all that openness of heart, and sweet peculiarity of manner, that spirit and ingenuousness which are so much a part of herself.
You have both warm hearts and benevolent feelings; and, Fanny, who that heard him read, and saw you listen to Shakespeare the other night, will think you unfitted as companions ?
Yes, when I reached the house I found the two sisters together by themselves; and when once we had begun, we had not done with you, Fanny, till Crawford and Dr. Grant came in.
Still, however, Fanny was oppressed and wearied; he saw it in her looks, it could not be talked away; and attempting it no more, he led her directly, with the kind authority of a privileged guardian, into the house.
Her heart is made for love and kindness, not for resentment.
I wish you could have overheard her tribute of praise; I wish you could have seen her countenance, when she said that you _ should _ be Henry ’s wife.
After leaving him to his happier thoughts for some minutes, Fanny, feeling it due to herself, returned to Mr. Crawford, and said, It is not merely in _ temper _ that I consider him as totally unsuited to myself; though, in _ that _ respect, I think the difference between us too great, infinitely too great : his spirits often oppress me; but there is something in him which I object to still more.
The surprise of your refusal, Fanny, seems to have been unbounded.
My dear Fanny, replied Edmund, scarcely hearing her to the end, let us not, any of us, be judged by what we appeared at that period of general folly.
As far as you have gone, Fanny, I think you perfectly right.
But ( with an affectionate smile ) let him succeed at last, Fanny, let him succeed at last.