said Fanny, quite cruel.
I do not consider her as meaning to wound my feelings.
The evil lies yet deeper : in her total ignorance, unsuspiciousness of there being such feelings; in a perversion of mind which made it natural to her to treat the subject as she did.
She was speaking only as she had been used to hear others speak, as she imagined everybody else would speak.
Lady Bertram could not give her much time, or many words, but she felt her, as Fanny ’s sister, to have a claim at Mansfield, and was ready to kiss and like her; and Susan was more than satisfied, for she came perfectly aware that nothing but ill - humour was to be expected from aunt Norris; and was so provided with happiness, so strong in that best of blessings, an escape from many certain evils, that she could have stood against a great deal more indifference than she met with from the others.
She was now left a good deal to herself, to get acquainted with the house and grounds as she could, and spent her days very happily in so doing, while those who might otherwise have attended to her were shut up, or wholly occupied each with the person quite dependent on them, at this time, for everything like comfort; Edmund trying to bury his own feelings in exertions for the relief of his brother ’s, and Fanny devoted to her aunt Bertram, returning to every former office with more than former zeal, and thinking she could never do enough for one who seemed so much to want her.
To talk over the dreadful business with Fanny, talk and lament, was all Lady Bertram ’s consolation.
She would not voluntarily give unnecessary pain to any one, and though I may deceive myself, I can not but think that for me, for my feelings, she would —.
For where, Fanny, shall we find a woman whom nature had so richly endowed ?
After repeating this, Edmund was so much affected that Fanny, watching him with silent, but most tender concern, was almost sorry that the subject had been entered on at all.
She saw it only as folly, and that folly stamped only by exposure.
He was aware of what Edmund must be suffering on his own behalf, in addition to all the rest, when they were in town : he had seen or conjectured his feelings; and, having reason to think that one interview with Miss Crawford had taken place, from which Edmund derived only increased distress, had been as anxious on that account as on others to get him out of town, and had engaged him in taking Fanny home to her aunt, with a view to his relief and benefit, no less than theirs.
The want of common discretion, of caution : his going down to Richmond for the whole time of her being at Twickenham; her putting herself in the power of a servant; it was the detection, in short — oh, Fanny !
And what, said Fanny ( believing herself required to speak ), what could you say ?
She went on, began to talk of you; yes, then she began to talk of you, regretting, as well she might, the loss of such a —.
There she spoke very rationally.
But she has always done justice to you.
My dearest Fanny, I am giving you, I hope, more pleasure than pain by this retrospect of what might have been — but what never can be now.
I had gone a few steps, Fanny, when I heard the door open behind me.