29 Catherine was too wretched to be fearful.
The journey in itself had no terrors for her; and she began it without either dreading its length or feeling its solitariness.
Leaning back in one corner of the carriage, in a violent burst of tears, she was conveyed some miles beyond the walls of the abbey before she raised her head; and the highest point of ground within the park was almost closed from her view before she was capable of turning her eyes towards it.
Unfortunately, the road she now travelled was the same which only ten days ago she had so happily passed along in going to and from Woodston; and, for fourteen miles, every bitter feeling was rendered more severe by the review of objects on which she had first looked under impressions so different.
Every mile, as it brought her nearer Woodston, added to her sufferings, and when within the distance of five, she passed the turning which led to it, and thought of Henry, so near, yet so unconscious, her grief and agitation were excessive.
The day which she had spent at that place had been one of the happiest of her life.
It was there, it was on that day, that the general had made use of such expressions with regard to Henry and herself, had so spoken and so looked as to give her the most positive conviction of his actually wishing their marriage.
Yes, only ten days ago had he elated her by his pointed regard — had he even confused her by his too significant reference !
And now — what had she done, or what had she omitted to do, to merit such a change ?
The only offence against him of which she could accuse herself had been such as was scarcely possible to reach his knowledge.
Henry and her own heart only were privy to the shocking suspicions which she had so idly entertained; and equally safe did she believe her secret with each.
Designedly, at least, Henry could not have betrayed her.
If, indeed, by any strange mischance his father should have gained intelligence of what she had dared to think and look for, of her causeless fancies and injurious examinations, she could not wonder at any degree of his indignation.
If aware of her having viewed him as a murderer, she could not wonder at his even turning her from his house.
But a justification so full of torture to herself, she trusted, would not be in his power.
Anxious as were all her conjectures on this point, it was not, however, the one on which she dwelt most.
How Henry would think, and feel, and look, when he returned on the morrow to Northanger and heard of her being gone, was a question of force and interest to rise over every other, to be never ceasing, alternately irritating and soothing; it sometimes suggested the dread of his calm acquiescence, and at others was answered by the sweetest confidence in his regret and resentment.
But, whatever might be the distress of Catherine ’s mind, as she thus advanced towards the parsonage, and whatever the humiliation of her biographer in relating it, she was preparing enjoyment of no everyday nature for those to whom she went; first, in the appearance of her carriage — and secondly, in herself.
Happy the glance that first distinguished Catherine !
Her father, mother, Sarah, George, and Harriet, all assembled at the door to welcome her with affectionate eagerness, was a sight to awaken the best feelings of Catherine ’s heart; and in the embrace of each, as she stepped from the carriage, she found herself soothed beyond anything that she had believed possible.
So surrounded, so caressed, she was even happy !
In the joyfulness of family love everything for a short time was subdued, and the pleasure of seeing her, leaving them at first little leisure for calm curiosity, they were all seated round the tea - table, which Mrs. Morland had hurried for the comfort of the poor traveller, whose pale and jaded looks soon caught her notice, before any inquiry so direct as to demand a positive answer was addressed to her.
Catherine sighed.
Well, continued her philosophic mother, I am glad I did not know of your journey at the time; but now it is all over, perhaps there is no great harm done.
It is always good for young people to be put upon exerting themselves; and you know, my dear Catherine, you always were a sad little scatter - brained creature; but now you must have been forced to have your wits about you, with so much changing of chaises and so forth; and I hope it will appear that you have not left anything behind you in any of the pockets.
Catherine hoped so too, and tried to feel an interest in her own amendment, but her spirits were quite worn down; and, to be silent and alone becoming soon her only wish, she readily agreed to her mother ’s next counsel of going early to bed.
Her parents, seeing nothing in her ill looks and agitation but the natural consequence of mortified feelings, and of the unusual exertion and fatigue of such a journey, parted from her without any doubt of their being soon slept away; and though, when they all met the next morning, her recovery was not equal to their hopes, they were still perfectly unsuspicious of there being any deeper evil.
They never once thought of her heart, which, for the parents of a young lady of seventeen, just returned from her first excursion from home, was odd enough !
As soon as breakfast was over, she sat down to fulfil her promise to Miss Tilney, whose trust in the effect of time and distance on her friend ’s disposition was already justified, for already did Catherine reproach herself with having parted from Eleanor coldly, with having never enough valued her merits or kindness, and never enough commiserated her for what she had been yesterday left to endure.
The strength of these feelings, however, was far from assisting her pen; and never had it been harder for her to write than in addressing Eleanor Tilney.
Catherine coloured as she warmly answered, No friend can be better worth keeping than Eleanor.
The hope of meeting again in the course of a few years could only put into Catherine ’s head what might happen within that time to make a meeting dreadful to her.
She could never forget Henry Tilney, or think of him with less tenderness than she did at that moment; but he might forget her; and in that case, to meet — !
Her eyes filled with tears as she pictured her acquaintance so renewed; and her mother, perceiving her comfortable suggestions to have had no good effect, proposed, as another expedient for restoring her spirits, that they should call on Mrs. Allen.
This was just such a summary view of the affair as Catherine could listen to; another sentence might have endangered her complaisance, and made her reply less rational; for soon were all her thinking powers swallowed up in the reflection of her own change of feelings and spirits since last she had trodden that well - known road.
It was not three months ago since, wild with joyful expectation, she had there run backwards and forwards some ten times a day, with an heart light, gay, and independent; looking forward to pleasures untasted and unalloyed, and free from the apprehension of evil as from the knowledge of it.
Three months ago had seen her all this; and now, how altered a being did she return !
She was received by the Allens with all the kindness which her unlooked - for appearance, acting on a steady affection, would naturally call forth; and great was their surprise, and warm their displeasure, on hearing how she had been treated — though Mrs. Morland ’s account of it was no inflated representation, no studied appeal to their passions.
She travelled all the way post by herself, and knew nothing of coming till Saturday night; for General Tilney, from some odd fancy or other, all of a sudden grew tired of having her there, and almost turned her out of the house.
Very unfriendly, certainly; and he must be a very odd man; but we are so glad to have her amongst us again !
And it is a great comfort to find that she is not a poor helpless creature, but can shift very well for herself.
Bath is a nice place, Catherine, after all.
Catherine could not answer; and, after a short trial of other subjects, Mrs. Allen again returned to — I really have not patience with the general !
His lodgings were taken the very day after he left them, Catherine.
There was a great deal of good sense in all this; but there are some situations of the human mind in which good sense has very little power; and Catherine ’s feelings contradicted almost every position her mother advanced.
It was upon the behaviour of these very slight acquaintance that all her present happiness depended; and while Mrs. Morland was successfully confirming her own opinions by the justness of her own representations, Catherine was silently reflecting that _ now _ Henry must have arrived at Northanger; _ now _ he must have heard of her departure; and _ now _, perhaps, they were all setting off for Hereford.