18 With a mind thus full of happiness, Catherine was hardly aware that two or three days had passed away, without her seeing Isabella for more than a few minutes together.
She began first to be sensible of this, and to sigh for her conversation, as she walked along the pump - room one morning, by Mrs. Allen ’s side, without anything to say or to hear; and scarcely had she felt a five minutes ’ longing of friendship, before the object of it appeared, and inviting her to a secret conference, led the way to a seat.
Catherine, with all the earnestness of truth, expressed her astonishment at such a charge, protesting her innocence of every thought of Mr. Thorpe ’s being in love with her, and the consequent impossibility of her having ever intended to encourage him.
Catherine heard all this, and quite out of countenance, could listen no longer.
My dearest Catherine, continued the other without at all listening to her, I would not for all the world be the means of hurrying you into an engagement before you knew what you were about.
She was so amazingly tired, and it was so odious to parade about the pump - room; and if she moved from her seat she should miss her sisters; she was expecting her sisters every moment; so that her dearest Catherine must excuse her, and must sit quietly down again.
But Catherine could be stubborn too; and Mrs. Allen just then coming up to propose their returning home, she joined her and walked out of the pump - room, leaving Isabella still sitting with Captain Tilney.
But, above all things, my dear Catherine, do not be in a hurry.
Catherine longed to give her a hint of it, to put her on her guard, and prevent all the pain which her too lively behaviour might otherwise create both for him and her brother.
Catherine, looking up, perceived Captain Tilney; and Isabella, earnestly fixing her eye on him as she spoke, soon caught his notice.
His first address made Catherine start.
Though spoken low, she could distinguish, What !
Well, my dear Catherine, the case seems to be that you are determined against poor John — is not it so ?
Nay, my sweetest Catherine, this is being quite absurd !