This critique, the justness of which was unfortunately lost on poor Catherine, brought them to the door of Mrs. Thorpe ’s lodgings, and the feelings of the discerning and unprejudiced reader of Camilla gave way to the feelings of the dutiful and affectionate son, as they met Mrs. Thorpe, who had descried them from above, in the passage.
said Catherine very seriously.
was uttered at the same moment by Catherine; and, on catching the young men ’s eyes, the horse was immediately checked with a violence which almost threw him on his haunches, and the servant having now scampered up, the gentlemen jumped out, and the equipage was delivered to his care.
Catherine, by whom this meeting was wholly unexpected, received her brother with the liveliest pleasure; and he, being of a very amiable disposition, and sincerely attached to her, gave every proof on his side of equal satisfaction, which he could have leisure to do, while the bright eyes of Miss Thorpe were incessantly challenging his notice; and to her his devoirs were speedily paid, with a mixture of joy and embarrassment which might have informed Catherine, had she been more expert in the development of other people ’s feelings, and less simply engrossed by her own, that her brother thought her friend quite as pretty as she could do herself.
John Thorpe, who in the meantime had been giving orders about the horses, soon joined them, and from him she directly received the amends which were her due; for while he slightly and carelessly touched the hand of Isabella, on her he bestowed a whole scrape and half a short bow.
My dearest Catherine, I quite envy you; but I am afraid, brother, you will not have room for a third.
These manners did not please Catherine; but he was James ’s friend and Isabella ’s brother; and her judgment was further bought off by Isabella ’s assuring her, when they withdrew to see the new hat, that John thought her the most charming girl in the world, and by John ’s engaging her before they parted to dance with him that evening.
This brought on a dialogue of civilities between the other two; but Catherine heard neither the particulars nor the result.
Her companion ’s discourse now sunk from its hitherto animated pitch to nothing more than a short decisive sentence of praise or condemnation on the face of every woman they met; and Catherine, after listening and agreeing as long as she could, with all the civility and deference of the youthful female mind, fearful of hazarding an opinion of its own in opposition to that of a self - assured man, especially where the beauty of her own sex is concerned, ventured at length to vary the subject by a question which had been long uppermost in her thoughts; it was, Have you ever read Udolpho, Mr. Thorpe ?
John Thorpe kept of course with Catherine, and, after a few minutes ’ silence, renewed the conversation about his gig.
Catherine, humbled and ashamed, was going to apologize for her question, but he prevented her by saying, Novels are all so full of nonsense and stuff; there has not been a tolerably decent one come out since Tom Jones, except The Monk; I read that t ’ other day; but as for all the others, they are the stupidest things in creation.
I need not ask you whether you are happy here, my dear Catherine; with such a companion and friend as Isabella Thorpe, it would be impossible for you to be otherwise; and the Allens, I am sure, are very kind to you ?
The time of the two parties uniting in the Octagon Room being correctly adjusted, Catherine was then left to the luxury of a raised, restless, and frightened imagination over the pages of Udolpho, lost from all worldly concerns of dressing and dinner, incapable of soothing Mrs. Allen ’s fears on the delay of an expected dressmaker, and having only one minute in sixty to bestow even on the reflection of her own felicity, in being already engaged for the evening.