Catherine was completely awakened.
Henry ’s address, short as it had been, had more thoroughly opened her eyes to the extravagance of her late fancies than all their several disappointments had done.
Most grievously was she humbled.
Most bitterly did she cry.
It was not only with herself that she was sunk — but with Henry.
Her folly, which now seemed even criminal, was all exposed to him, and he must despise her forever.
The liberty which her imagination had dared to take with the character of his father — could he ever forgive it ?
The absurdity of her curiosity and her fears — could they ever be forgotten ?
She hated herself more than she could express.
He had — she thought he had, once or twice before this fatal morning, shown something like affection for her.
But now — in short, she made herself as miserable as possible for about half an hour, went down when the clock struck five, with a broken heart, and could scarcely give an intelligible answer to Eleanor ’s inquiry if she was well.
But perhaps, observed Catherine, though she has behaved so ill by our family, she may behave better by yours.
Catherine had never wanted comfort more, and he looked as if he was aware of it.
The evening wore away with no abatement of this soothing politeness; and her spirits were gradually raised to a modest tranquillity.
She did not learn either to forget or defend the past; but she learned to hope that it would never transpire farther, and that it might not cost her Henry ’s entire regard.
Her thoughts being still chiefly fixed on what she had with such causeless terror felt and done, nothing could shortly be clearer than that it had been all a voluntary, self - created delusion, each trifling circumstance receiving importance from an imagination resolved on alarm, and everything forced to bend to one purpose by a mind which, before she entered the abbey, had been craving to be frightened.
She remembered with what feelings she had prepared for a knowledge of Northanger.
She saw that the infatuation had been created, the mischief settled, long before her quitting Bath, and it seemed as if the whole might be traced to the influence of that sort of reading which she had there indulged.
I can not forget that, when she first knew what my father would do for them, she seemed quite disappointed that it was not more.
My own disappointment and loss in her is very great; but, as for poor James, I suppose he will hardly ever recover it.
Catherine dared not doubt beyond her own country, and even of that, if hard pressed, would have yielded the northern and western extremities.
To say the truth, though I am hurt and grieved, that I can not still love her, that I am never to hear from her, perhaps never to see her again, I do not feel so very, very much afflicted as one would have thought.
Catherine, by some chance or other, found her spirits so very much relieved by this conversation that she could not regret her being led on, though so unaccountably, to mention the circumstance which had produced it.
Now she has really got the man she likes, she may be constant.
For nine successive mornings, Catherine wondered over the repetition of a disappointment, which each morning became more severe : but, on the tenth, when she entered the breakfast - room, her first object was a letter, held out by Henry ’s willing hand.
She thanked him as heartily as if he had written it himself.
Indeed I am afraid she will, replied Henry; I am afraid she will be very constant, unless a baronet should come in her way; that is Frederick ’s only chance.
She opened it; it was from Oxford; and to this purpose : Dear Catherine, Though, God knows, with little inclination for writing, I think it my duty to tell you that everything is at an end between Miss Thorpe and me.
Let me soon hear from you, dear Catherine; you are my only friend; _ your _ love I do build upon.
Dearest Catherine, beware how you give your heart.
Believe me, & c. Catherine had not read three lines before her sudden change of countenance, and short exclamations of sorrowing wonder, declared her to be receiving unpleasant news; and Henry, earnestly watching her through the whole letter, saw plainly that it ended no better than it began.
They went to breakfast directly; but Catherine could hardly eat anything.
Tears filled her eyes, and even ran down her cheeks as she sat.
The letter was one moment in her hand, then in her lap, and then in her pocket; and she looked as if she knew not what she did.
The general, between his cocoa and his newspaper, had luckily no leisure for noticing her; but to the other two her distress was equally visible.
As soon as she dared leave the table she hurried away to her own room; but the housemaids were busy in it, and she was obliged to come down again.
She turned into the drawing - room for privacy, but Henry and Eleanor had likewise retreated thither, and were at that moment deep in consultation about her.
After half an hour ’s free indulgence of grief and reflection, Catherine felt equal to encountering her friends; but whether she should make her distress known to them was another consideration.
Perhaps, if particularly questioned, she might just give an idea — just distantly hint at it — but not more.
Catherine took her place at the table, and, after a short silence, Eleanor said, No bad news from Fullerton, I hope ?
cried Catherine : you have guessed it, I declare !
No, read it yourself, cried Catherine, whose second thoughts were clearer.
I do not know what I was thinking of ( blushing again that she had blushed before ); James only means to give me good advice.
Miss Tilney, at Catherine ’s invitation, now read the letter likewise, and, having expressed also her concern and surprise, began to inquire into Miss Thorpe ’s connections and fortune.
Her mother is a very good sort of woman, was Catherine ’s answer.
What was her father ?