12 Mrs. Allen, said Catherine the next morning, will there be any harm in my calling on Miss Tilney today ?
Catherine cheerfully complied, and being properly equipped, was more impatient than ever to be at the pump - room, that she might inform herself of General Tilney ’s lodgings, for though she believed they were in Milsom Street, she was not certain of the house, and Mrs. Allen ’s wavering convictions only made it more doubtful.
Catherine was the immediate object of his gallantry; and, while they waited in the lobby for a chair, he prevented the inquiry which had travelled from her heart almost to the tip of her tongue, by asking, in a consequential manner, whether she had seen him talking with General Tilney : He is a fine old fellow, upon my soul !
Catherine, with a blush of mortification, left the house.
She felt almost persuaded that Miss Tilney _ was _ at home, and too much offended to admit her; and as she retired down the street, could not withhold one glance at the drawing - room windows, in expectation of seeing her there, but no one appeared at them.
She was followed by a gentleman, whom Catherine believed to be her father, and they turned up towards Edgar ’s Buildings.
Catherine, in deep mortification, proceeded on her way.
She could almost be angry herself at such angry incivility; but she checked the resentful sensation; she remembered her own ignorance.
She knew not how such an offence as hers might be classed by the laws of worldly politeness, to what a degree of unforgivingness it might with propriety lead, nor to what rigours of rudeness in return it might justly make her amenable.
Dejected and humbled, she had even some thoughts of not going with the others to the theatre that night; but it must be confessed that they were not of long continuance, for she soon recollected, in the first place, that she was without any excuse for staying at home; and, in the second, that it was a play she wanted very much to see.
She was not deceived in her own expectation of pleasure; the comedy so well suspended her care that no one, observing her during the first four acts, would have supposed she had any wretchedness about her.
On the beginning of the fifth, however, the sudden view of Mr. Henry Tilney and his father, joining a party in the opposite box, recalled her to anxiety and distress.
The stage could no longer excite genuine merriment — no longer keep her whole attention.
Every other look upon an average was directed towards the opposite box; and, for the space of two entire scenes, did she thus watch Henry Tilney, without being once able to catch his eye.
Here Catherine, who was much less gratified by his admiration than by General Tilney ’s, was not sorry to be called away by Mr. Allen.
At length, however, he did look towards her, and he bowed — but such a bow !
Catherine was restlessly miserable; she could almost have run round to the box in which he sat and forced him to hear her explanation.
Feelings rather natural than heroic possessed her; instead of considering her own dignity injured by this ready condemnation — instead of proudly resolving, in conscious innocence, to show her resentment towards him who could harbour a doubt of it, to leave to him all the trouble of seeking an explanation, and to enlighten him on the past only by avoiding his sight, or flirting with somebody else — she took to herself all the shame of misconduct, or at least of its appearance, and was only eager for an opportunity of explaining its cause.
She was right; in a few minutes he appeared, and, making his way through the then thinning rows, spoke with like calm politeness to Mrs. Allen and her friend.
With a yet sweeter smile, he said everything that need be said of his sister ’s concern, regret, and dependence on Catherine ’s honour.
Do not say Miss Tilney was not angry, cried Catherine, because I know she was; for she would not see me this morning when I called; I saw her walk out of the house the next minute after my leaving it; I was hurt, but I was not affronted.
Catherine ’s mind was greatly eased by this information, yet a something of solicitude remained, from which sprang the following question, thoroughly artless in itself, though rather distressing to the gentleman : But, Mr. Tilney, why were _ you _ less generous than your sister ?
He remained with them some time, and was only too agreeable for Catherine to be contented when he went away.
Before they parted, however, it was agreed that the projected walk should be taken as soon as possible; and, setting aside the misery of his quitting their box, she was, upon the whole, left one of the happiest creatures in the world.
While talking to each other, she had observed with some surprise that John Thorpe, who was never in the same part of the house for ten minutes together, was engaged in conversation with General Tilney; and she felt something more than surprise when she thought she could perceive herself the object of their attention and discourse.