15 Early the next day, a note from Isabella, speaking peace and tenderness in every line, and entreating the immediate presence of her friend on a matter of the utmost importance, hastened Catherine, in the happiest state of confidence and curiosity, to Edgar ’s Buildings.
The two youngest Miss Thorpes were by themselves in the parlour; and, on Anne ’s quitting it to call her sister, Catherine took the opportunity of asking the other for some particulars of their yesterday ’s party.
Maria desired no greater pleasure than to speak of it; and Catherine immediately learnt that it had been altogether the most delightful scheme in the world, that nobody could imagine how charming it had been, and that it had been more delightful than anybody could conceive.
Catherine listened with heartfelt satisfaction.
Maria was without ceremony sent away, and Isabella, embracing Catherine, thus began : Yes, my dear Catherine, it is so indeed; your penetration has not deceived you.
replied Catherine — finding that he waited for an answer.
Catherine replied only by a look of wondering ignorance.
My dear Catherine, you alone, who know my heart, can judge of my present happiness.
Catherine ’s understanding began to awake : an idea of the truth suddenly darted into her mind; and, with the natural blush of so new an emotion, she cried out, Good heaven !
Never had Catherine listened to anything so full of interest, wonder, and joy.
Her brother and her friend engaged !
New to such circumstances, the importance of it appeared unspeakably great, and she contemplated it as one of those grand events, of which the ordinary course of life can hardly afford a return.
The strength of her feelings she could not express; the nature of them, however, contented her friend.
Delighting, however, as Catherine sincerely did in the prospect of the connection, it must be acknowledged that Isabella far surpassed her in tender anticipations.
This was a pitch of friendship beyond Catherine.
Here Catherine secretly acknowledged the power of love; for, though exceedingly fond of her brother, and partial to all his endowments, she had never in her life thought him handsome.
Catherine, the many sleepless nights I have had on your brother ’s account !
It was to Catherine the most surprising insensibility.
Catherine felt that nothing could have been safer; but ashamed of an ignorance little expected, she dared no longer contest the point, nor refuse to have been as full of arch penetration and affectionate sympathy as Isabella chose to consider her.
Catherine endeavoured to persuade her, as she was herself persuaded, that her father and mother would never oppose their son ’s wishes.
My sweet Catherine, in _ your _ generous heart I know it would signify nothing; but we must not expect such disinterestedness in many.
This charming sentiment, recommended as much by sense as novelty, gave Catherine a most pleasing remembrance of all the heroines of her acquaintance; and she thought her friend never looked more lovely than in uttering the grand idea.
I am sure they will consent, was her frequent declaration; I am sure they will be delighted with you.
cried Catherine.
Catherine wished to congratulate him, but knew not what to say, and her eloquence was only in her eyes.
Twice was he called almost from the door by her eagerness to have him gone.
To Catherine ’s simple feelings, this odd sort of reserve seemed neither kindly meant, nor consistently supported; and its unkindness she would hardly have forborne pointing out, had its inconsistency been less their friend; but Anne and Maria soon set her heart at ease by the sagacity of their I know what; and the evening was spent in a sort of war of wit, a display of family ingenuity, on one side in the mystery of an affected secret, on the other of undefined discovery, all equally acute.
Catherine was with her friend again the next day, endeavouring to support her spirits and while away the many tedious hours before the delivery of the letters; a needful exertion, for as the time of reasonable expectation drew near, Isabella became more and more desponding, and before the letter arrived, had worked herself into a state of real distress.
Catherine wished him a good journey.
Without appearing to hear her, he walked to the window, fidgeted about, hummed a tune, and seemed wholly self - occupied.
said Catherine.