Anne entered it with a sinking heart, anticipating an imprisonment of many months, and anxiously saying to herself, Oh !
A degree of unexpected cordiality, however, in the welcome she received, did her good.
Her father and sister were glad to see her, for the sake of shewing her the house and furniture, and met her with kindness.
Her making a fourth, when they sat down to dinner, was noticed as an advantage.
Anne could not have supposed it possible that her first evening in Camden Place could have passed so well !
Anne had always felt that she would pretend what was proper on her arrival, but the complaisance of the others was unlooked for.
They were evidently in excellent spirits, and she was soon to listen to the causes.
They had no inclination to listen to her.
After laying out for some compliments of being deeply regretted in their old neighbourhood, which Anne could not pay, they had only a few faint enquiries to make, before the talk must be all their own.
They had the pleasure of assuring her that Bath more than answered their expectations in every respect.
Could Anne wonder that her father and sister were happy ?
She might not wonder, but she must sigh that her father should feel no degradation in his change, should see nothing to regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder, should find so much to be vain of in the littlenesses of a town; and she must sigh, and smile, and wonder too, as Elizabeth threw open the folding - doors and walked with exultation from one drawing - room to the other, boasting of their space; at the possibility of that woman, who had been mistress of Kellynch Hall, finding extent to be proud of between two walls, perhaps thirty feet asunder.
Anne had a great deal to hear of Mr Elliot.
Anne was considering whether she should venture to suggest that a gown, or a cap, would not be liable to any such misuse, when a knock at the door suspended everything.
Anne drew a little back, while the others received his compliments, and her sister his apologies for calling at so unusual an hour, but he could not be so near without wishing to know that neither she nor her friend had taken cold the day before, & c. & c; which was all as politely done, and as politely taken, as possible, but her part must follow then.
Sir Walter talked of his youngest daughter; Mr Elliot must give him leave to present him to his youngest daughter ( there was no occasion for remembering Mary ); and Anne, smiling and blushing, very becomingly shewed to Mr Elliot the pretty features which he had by no means forgotten, and instantly saw, with amusement at his little start of surprise, that he had not been at all aware of who she was.
Anne listened, but without quite understanding it.
Allowances, large allowances, she knew, must be made for the ideas of those who spoke.
She heard it all under embellishment.
He was quite as good - looking as he had appeared at Lyme, his countenance improved by speaking, and his manners were so exactly what they ought to be, so polished, so easy, so particularly agreeable, that she could compare them in excellence to only one person's manners.
Still, however, she had the sensation of there being something more than immediately appeared, in Mr Elliot's wishing, after an interval of so many years, to be well received by them.
As soon as he could, he began to talk to her of Lyme, wanting to compare opinions respecting the place, but especially wanting to speak of the circumstance of their happening to be guests in the same inn at the same time; to give his own route, understand something of hers, and regret that he should have lost such an opportunity of paying his respects to her.
She gave him a short account of her party and business at Lyme.
Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at Lyme, but without being much attended to.
His enquiries, however, produced at length an account of the scene she had been engaged in there, soon after his leaving the place.
But he must not be addressing his reflections to Anne alone : he knew it; he was soon diffused again among the others, and it was only at intervals that he could return to Lyme.