19 While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne, and expressing his wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath, Captain Wentworth was already on his way thither.
Before Mrs Croft had written, he was arrived, and the very next time Anne walked out, she saw him.
It began to rain, not much, but enough to make shelter desirable for women, and quite enough to make it very desirable for Miss Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed home in Lady Dalrymple's carriage, which was seen waiting at a little distance; she, Anne, and Mrs Clay, therefore, turned into Molland 's, while Mr Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple, to request her assistance.
Anne is too delicate for them.
Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin, if he would have walked by her side all the way to Camden Place, without saying a word.
She had never found it so difficult to listen to him, though nothing could exceed his solicitude and care, and though his subjects were principally such as were wont to be always interesting : praise, warm, just, and discriminating, of Lady Russell, and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay.
The rain was a mere trifle, and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with Mr Elliot.
much thicker than Miss Anne 's; and, in short, her civility rendered her quite as anxious to be left to walk with Mr Elliot as Anne could be, and it was discussed between them with a generosity so polite and so determined, that the others were obliged to settle it for them; Miss Elliot maintaining that Mrs Clay had a little cold already, and Mr Elliot deciding on appeal, that his cousin Anne's boots were rather the thickest.
It was fixed accordingly, that Mrs Clay should be of the party in the carriage; and they had just reached this point, when Anne, as she sat near the window, descried, most decidedly and distinctly, Captain Wentworth walking down the street.
Her start was perceptible only to herself; but she instantly felt that she was the greatest simpleton in the world, the most unaccountable and absurd !
For a few minutes she saw nothing before her; it was all confusion.
She was lost, and when she had scolded back her senses, she found the others still waiting for the carriage, and Mr Elliot ( always obliging ) just setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mrs Clay 's.
The following morning Anne was out with her friend, and for the first hour, in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain; but at last, in returning down Pulteney Street, she distinguished him on the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in view the greater part of the street.
She looked instinctively at Lady Russell; but not from any mad idea of her recognising him so soon as she did herself.
Anne sighed and blushed and smiled, in pity and disdain, either at her friend or herself.
Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed : neither of them, probably, much the wiser for what they heard, and Anne continuing fully sensible of his being less at ease than formerly.
The part which provoked her most, was that in all this waste of foresight and caution, she should have lost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them.
The theatre or the rooms, where he was most likely to be, were not fashionable enough for the Elliots, whose evening amusements were solely in the elegant stupidity of private parties, in which they were getting more and more engaged; and Anne, wearied of such a state of stagnation, sick of knowing nothing, and fancying herself stronger because her strength was not tried, was quite impatient for the concert evening.
It did not surprise, but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabeth would not know him.
At last Miss Elliot and her friend, unattended but by the servant, ( for there was no cousin returned ), were walking off; and Captain Wentworth, watching them, turned again to Anne, and by manner, rather than words, was offering his services to her.
I am much obliged to you, was her answer, but I am not going with them.
Anne named them all.
Anne was startled and confused; but after standing in a moment's suspense, was obliged, and not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away.
There was no difference between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme, admiring Anne as she passed, except in the air and look and manner of the privileged relation and friend.
being all that she had time for, as she passed away.