She had been repeatedly very earnest in trying to get Anne included in the visit to London, sensibly open to all the injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangements which shut her out, and on many lesser occasions had endeavoured to give Elizabeth the advantage of her own better judgement and experience; but always in vain : Elizabeth would go her own way; and never had she pursued it in more decided opposition to Lady Russell than in this selection of Mrs Clay; turning from the society of so deserving a sister, to bestow her affection and confidence on one who ought to have been nothing to her but the object of distant civility.
Herself the widow of only a knight, she gave the dignity of a baronet all its due; and Sir Walter, independent of his claims as an old acquaintance, an attentive neighbour, an obliging landlord, the husband of her very dear friend, the father of Anne and her sisters, was, as being Sir Walter, in her apprehension, entitled to a great deal of compassion and consideration under his present difficulties.
But she was very anxious to have it done with the least possible pain to him and Elizabeth.
She drew up plans of economy, she made exact calculations, and she did what nobody else thought of doing : she consulted Anne, who never seemed considered by the others as having any interest in the question.
Every emendation of Anne's had been on the side of honesty against importance.
She wanted more vigorous measures, a more complete reformation, a quicker release from debt, a much higher tone of indifference for everything but justice and equity.
This was the principle on which Anne wanted her father to be proceeding, his friends to be urging him.
She considered it as an act of indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors with all the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchments could secure, and saw no dignity in anything short of it.
She wanted it to be prescribed, and felt as a duty.
She rated Lady Russell's influence highly; and as to the severe degree of self - denial which her own conscience prompted, she believed there might be little more difficulty in persuading them to a complete, than to half a reformation.
Her knowledge of her father and Elizabeth inclined her to think that the sacrifice of one pair of horses would be hardly less painful than of both, and so on, through the whole list of Lady Russell's too gentle reductions.
How Anne's more rigid requisitions might have been taken is of little consequence.
All Anne's wishes had been for the latter.
But the usual fate of Anne attended her, in having something very opposite from her inclination fixed on.
She disliked Bath, and did not think it agreed with her; and Bath was to be her home.
Lady Russell felt obliged to oppose her dear Anne's known wishes.
Anne herself would have found the mortifications of it more than she foresaw, and to Sir Walter's feelings they must have been dreadful.
And with regard to Anne's dislike of Bath, she considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising, first, from the circumstance of her having been three years at school there, after her mother's death; and secondly, from her happening to be not in perfectly good spirits the only winter which she had afterwards spent there with herself.
Anne had been too little from home, too little seen.
Her spirits were not high.
She wanted her to be more known.