51 Their sister ’s wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for herself.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth : Lizzy, I never gave _ you _ an account of my wedding, I believe.
She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother ’s right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, Ah !
certainly, said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; we will ask you no questions.
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away.
Mr. Darcy had been at her sister ’s wedding.
Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none.
Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable.
She could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man.
_ She _ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.
The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began enquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her replies.
Jane ’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it; — till it appeared whether her enquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.
repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.
Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, Oh !
Wickham ’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia ’s for him.
She got up, and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining parlour.