The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips.
The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told — the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy.
She dared not even mention that gentleman.
Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved.
This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley.
He enquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr. Wickham ’s attentions.
Elizabeth went away with her head full of him.
She could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent.
As much as I ever wish to be, cried Elizabeth very warmly.
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further enquiry.
cried Elizabeth; but how could _ that _ be ?
But what, said she, after a pause, can have been his motive ?
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father !
cried Elizabeth.
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying : I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley !