18 Till Elizabeth entered the drawing - room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her.
The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her.
She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening.
Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance.
This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham ’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
But Elizabeth was not formed for ill - humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice.
Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give.
The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked.
When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him.
He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her : I dare say you will find him very agreeable.
Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane.
She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley ’s two sisters.
Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her neighbours ’ looks, their equal amazement in beholding it.
They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance.
Her mother ’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much.
After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with : — It is _ your _ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy.
When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person ( Lady Lucas ) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Mr. Bingley.
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother ’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them.
Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
Both, replied Elizabeth archly; for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds.
Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation.
She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her.
Elizabeth now began to revive.
But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company.
Elizabeth ’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.
A deeper shade of _ hauteur _ overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on.
Elizabeth was in agonies.
She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley.
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father ’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good.
To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed.
That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement.
She was teased by Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others.
In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for _ her _, the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.
said Elizabeth to herself.
She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make enquiries on the same subject of Bingley.
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane ’s being in the fairest way for happiness.
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment.
Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr. Bingley ’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it.
On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose enquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.