was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table.
She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge.
She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _ knew _ that she was happy than _ felt _ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her.
She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a _ dislike _ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
Elizabeth ’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour ’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure.
When her mother went up to her dressing - room at night, she followed her, and made the important communication.
Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth.
forgive the question — are you quite certain that you can be happy with him ?
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted : and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away.
But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
This was a sad omen of what her mother ’s behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations ’ consent, there was still something to be wished for.
But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son - in - law that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem.
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy.
She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend.
But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia ’s marriage.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to - day ?
Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented.
As she went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying : I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself.
Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother ’s.
She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man.
But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme.
She did not fear her father ’s opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means — that _ she _, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her — was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile.
In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, Go to your father, he wants you in the library.
Well, my dear, said he, when she ceased speaking, I have no more to say.