Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth ’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word.
Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyship ’s entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.
After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth, I hope you are well, Miss Bennet.
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling.
But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth, Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn.
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs.
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her waiting - woman was in it.
They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
said she, as she looked in her face.
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself.
She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs.
Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing - room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment ’s deliberation : I am not.