17 Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself.
Elizabeth ’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley ’s invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening ’s amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance.
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in.
She had fully proposed being engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins instead !
her liveliness had never been worse timed.
Mr. Wickham ’s happiness and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins ’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could.
She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more.
It now first struck her, that _ she _ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to _ her _.
Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply.
Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.
To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others.
Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy ’s look and behaviour.
The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball.