47 I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth, said her uncle, as they drove from the town; and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the matter.
As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table : This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson : that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful; and that she can not be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply.
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half - an - hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making many enquiries, which Jane was equally eager to satisfy.
After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject, by saying, But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice.
But she is very young; she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half - year, nay, for a twelvemonth — she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity.
She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
Since the — — shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officers have been in her head.
She has been doing everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater — what shall I call it ?
susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough.
Jane then took it from her pocket - book, and gave it to Elizabeth.
I do indeed, replied Elizabeth, colouring.
cried Elizabeth when she had finished it.
From Elizabeth ’s thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self - reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.
It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long expectations.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her mother ’s apartment, immediately met her.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives.
She then proceeded to enquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
cried Elizabeth.
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party.
When they were all in the drawing - room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give.