Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame.
She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy ’s objections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned.
As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go.
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry.
It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time.
Having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so.
She had even learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary.
In his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure, for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had since passed, to provoke her.
She lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
On the very last day of the regiment ’s remaining at Meryton, he dined, with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some enquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam ’s and Mr. Darcy ’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment ’s recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him.
Her answer was warmly in his favour.
cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her.
said Elizabeth.
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning.
Wickham ’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents : You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the _ appearance _ of what is right.
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head.
She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him.
The rest of the evening passed with the _ appearance _, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.