26 Mrs. Gardiner ’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on : You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly.
Elizabeth shook her head over this letter.
It convinced her that accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister ’s being in town.
Elizabeth, you are not serious now.
— Yours, etc. This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented.
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself.
Thursday was to be the wedding day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother ’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room.
Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that _ she _ would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it.
The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear - sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte ’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.
Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible.
Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what had been, rather than what was.
Charlotte ’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen.
It was Mr. Collins ’s picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there to know the rest.
Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.
Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is.