8 At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half - past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner.
To the civil enquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley ’s, she could not make a very favourable answer.
The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter : and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency.
Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room.
I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning.
Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself.
On entering the drawing - room she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below, with a book.
Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the table where a few books were lying.
He immediately offered to fetch her others — all that his library afforded.
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card - table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.
She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet ’s height, or rather taller.
Then, observed Elizabeth, you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman.
As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her.
This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother ’s proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better.