On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words : May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning ?
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet answered instantly, Oh dear !
And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out : Dear madam, do not go.
To such perseverance in wilful self - deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
And upon Elizabeth ’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added : Lizzy, I _ insist _ upon your staying and hearing Mr. Collins.
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction — and a moment ’s consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion.
The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further, and he continued : My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances ( like myself ) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly — which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness.