She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged.
I am not afraid of her dying.
She will be taken good care of.
As long as she stays there, it is all very well.
I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative.
She declared her resolution.
How can you be so silly, cried her mother, as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt !
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together.
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers ’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise.
She was shown into the breakfast - parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it.
She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their brother ’s manners there was something better than politeness; there was good humour and kindness.
The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasion ’s justifying her coming so far alone.
Her enquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered.
Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance.
She was not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with.
Elizabeth silently attended her.
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane.
Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere.
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so.
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply of clothes.