He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son - in - law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh — the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all dinner - time.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth — Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady ’s attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others.
In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl.
Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly.
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been the case.
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.
Elizabeth ’s courage did not fail her.
She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought she could witness without trepidation.
As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte ’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was.
She was not rendered formidable by silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self - importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth ’s mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.
Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly.