34 When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her being in Kent.
Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal.
Mr. Darcy ’s shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister ’s sufferings.
It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next — and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.
Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word.
After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began : In vain I have struggled.
Elizabeth ’s astonishment was beyond expression.
She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent.
This he considered sufficient encouragement; and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her, immediately followed.
Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said : You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.
His sense of her inferiority — of its being a degradation — of the family obstacles which had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit.
In spite of her deeply - rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man ’s affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger.
She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done.
He concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand.
As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer.
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued : You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.
Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her cheeks, and she said : In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned.
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification.
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great.
She knew not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half - an - hour.
Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it.
That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy !
That he should have been in love with her for so many months !
So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend ’s marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case — was almost incredible !
The pause was to Elizabeth ’s feelings dreadful.
But it is not merely this affair, she continued, on which my dislike is founded.