53 Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet.
Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes.
How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell.
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat.
It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present.
When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley, said her mother, I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Bennet ’s manor.
Elizabeth ’s misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious attention !
Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion.
At that instant, she felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion.
It was many months since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said : I saw you look at me to - day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I appeared distressed.
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it.
Had she not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there _ with _ his friend ’s permission, or being bold enough to come without it.
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it.
They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.
I wish I could say anything to comfort you, replied Elizabeth; but it is wholly out of my power.
Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window — she looked, — she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister.
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern.
But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner ’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him.
Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected.
On the gentlemen ’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command.
She had ventured only one glance at Darcy.
He looked serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pemberley.
But, perhaps he could not in her mother ’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt.
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed.
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied.
Darcy, after enquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything.