replied Elinor, why should you think so ?
With such a knowledge as this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject.
She was far from depending on that result of his preference of her, which her mother and sister still considered as certain.
Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; but the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by the drawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight, which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste.
Yet, though smiling within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for that blind partiality to Edward which produced it.
I hope, Marianne, continued Elinor, you do not consider him as deficient in general taste.
Nay, the longer they were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard; and sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no more than friendship.
She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and instantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor should not be exposed another week to such insinuations.
At length she replied : Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits.
Of his sense and his goodness, continued Elinor, no one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation.
Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settle at some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their present acquaintance.
On _ that _ head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose her mother ’s intention of removing into Devonshire.
The house, too, as described by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so uncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on either point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter of acquiescence.
I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now.
Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him.
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion.
She believed the regard to be mutual; but she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne ’s conviction of their attachment agreeable to her.
Elinor could not help laughing.
Excuse me, said she; and be assured that I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my own feelings.
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.
She could not consider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Marianne had believed it.