— it is Elinor of whom _ we _ think and speak.
Elinor could not _ now _ be made unhappy by this behaviour.
A few months ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs. Ferrars ’ power to distress her by it now; and the difference of her manners to the Miss Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more, only amused her.
Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne ’s warmth than she had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon ’s eyes, as they were fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only what was amiable in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister slighted in the smallest point.
Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask, whether Edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell her that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband ’s expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believed them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.
The cold insolence of Mrs. Ferrars ’s general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to her, to foretell such difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as her own wounded heart taught her to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse of affectionate sensibility, she moved after a moment, to her sister ’s chair, and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to hers, said in a low, but eager, voice, Dear, dear Elinor, do n’t mind them.
Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor ’s compassion on being unable to see Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome, and hiding her face on Elinor ’s shoulder, she burst into tears.
Elinor was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had missed him.
They were to meet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to be of the party.
The expectation of seeing _ her _, however, was enough to make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet Edward ’s mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, was as lively as ever.
said her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his attention : She has not such good health as her sister, — she is very nervous, — she has not Elinor ’s constitution; — and one must allow that there is something very trying to a young woman who _ has been _ a beauty in the loss of her personal attractions.
You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne _ was _ remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.
Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William ’s side, by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still more, did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.
Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a very pretty pair of screens for her sister - in - law, which being now just mounted and brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens, catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemen into the room, were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration.
Mrs. Ferrars, not aware of their being Elinor ’s work, particularly requested to look at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of Lady Middletons ’s approbation, Fanny presented them to her mother, considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done by Miss Dashwood.
— She was already greatly displeased with Mrs. Ferrars; and such ill - timed praise of another, at Elinor ’s expense, though she had not any notion of what was principally meant by it, provoked her immediately to say with warmth, This is admiration of a very particular kind !
Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton ’s mother, rather than her own, whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assured her, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her — to the utter amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hoped at least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.