Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him, obeyed the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room, and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended by his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of command than supplication, Miss Dashwood, for half an hour — for ten minutes — I entreat you to stay.
Elinor first spoke.
Did you tell her that you should soon return ?
I do not know what I told her, he replied, impatiently; less than was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the future.
Elinor made no answer.
Her thoughts were silently fixed on the irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the mind, the character, the happiness, of a man who, to every advantage of person and talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a feeling, affectionate temper.
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and seemed not to hear her.
Well, sir, said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew impatient for his departure, and this is all ?
Elinor would not speak.
Did she show it you ?
For God ’s sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not ?
— Every line, every word was — in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she here, would forbid — a dagger to my heart.
We hope she is.
Elinor assured him that she did; — that she forgave, pitied, wished him well — was even interested in his happiness — and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it.
She began to think that he must be in liquor; — the strangeness of such a visit, and of such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this impression she immediately rose, saying, Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe.
Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again — Elinor stopped him with a reproof.
— cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understand what he would be at.
Elinor bowed her assent.
I do not know, said he, after a pause of expectation on her side, and thoughtfulness on his own, how _ you _ may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister, or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me.
Yes, I found myself, by insensible degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours of my life were what I spent with her when I felt my intentions were strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless.
Even _ then _, however, when fully determined on paying my addresses to her, I allowed myself most improperly to put off, from day to day, the moment of doing it, from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my circumstances were so greatly embarrassed.
I acknowledge that her situation and her character ought to have been respected by me.
I do not mean to justify myself, but at the same time can not leave you to suppose that I have nothing to urge — that because she was injured she was irreproachable, and because _ I _ was a libertine, _ she _ must be a saint.
If the violence of her passions, the weakness of her understanding — I do not mean, however, to defend myself.
Her affection for me deserved better treatment, and I often, with great self - reproach, recall the tenderness which, for a very short time, had the power of creating any return.
said Elinor, reproachfully; a note would have answered every purpose.