It suggested no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by, without claiming a share in what was passing.
The letter F — had been likewise invariably brought forward, and found productive of such countless jokes, that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had been long established with Elinor.
But this did not last long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head, had hardly done wondering at Charlotte ’s being so happy without a cause, at Mr. Palmer ’s acting so simply, with good abilities, and at the strange unsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife, before Sir John ’s and Mrs. Jennings ’s active zeal in the cause of society, procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe.
I think every one _ must _ admire it, replied Elinor, who ever saw the place; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its beauties as we do.
From such commendation as this, however, there was not much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in the world were to be met with in every part of England, under every possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding.
Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise.
She wished very much to have the subject continued, though she did not chuse to join in it herself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time in her life, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity after petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it.
Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.
She did her best when thus called on, by speaking of Lady Middleton with more warmth than she felt, though with far less than Miss Lucy.
The vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest left her no recommendation, and as Elinor was not blinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want of real elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any wish of knowing them better.
And to be better acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevitable lot, for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles, their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of intimacy must be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour or two together in the same room almost every day.
Their manners were particularly civil, and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of sense, when she saw with what constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton.
To do him justice, he did every thing in his power to promote their unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins ’ situations in the most delicate particulars; and Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before the eldest of them wished her joy on her sister ’s having been so lucky as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton.
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than he had been with respect to Marianne; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of the two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural; and since Edward ’s visit, they had never dined together without his drinking to her best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and winks, as to excite general attention.