About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit to Mrs. Palmer, entered the drawing - room, where Elinor was sitting by herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to hear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea, began directly to justify it, by saying, Lord !
In such a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from her whatever promise she required; and at her request, Marianne engaged never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of bitterness; to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of dislike to her; and even to see Edward himself, if chance should bring them together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality.
— Such advances towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel equal to any thing herself.
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time enough to collect her thoughts, she was able to give such an answer, and make such observations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce.
Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interest in it; that Mrs. Jennings ( as she had of late often hoped might be the case ) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward; and happy above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she felt very well able to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her judgment, as she believed, with impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion.
No time was to be lost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted with the real truth, and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others, without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any resentment against Edward.
Elinor ’s office was a painful one.
— She was going to remove what she really believed to be her sister ’s chief consolation, — to give such particulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her good opinion, - and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situations, which to _ her _ fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointment over again.
But unwelcome as such a task must be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it.
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings, or to represent herself as suffering much, any otherwise than as the self - command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward ’s engagement, might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.
Elinor was to be the comforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs; and all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure of mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but of imprudence, was readily offered.
Edward seemed a second Willoughby; and acknowledging as Elinor did, that she _ had _ loved him most sincerely, could she feel less than herself !
She would not even admit it to have been natural; and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that which only could convince her, a better knowledge of mankind.
Her first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact of the engagement, and the length of time it had existed.
The first question on her side, which led to farther particulars, was, — How long has this been known to you, Elinor ?
Elinor confirmed it.
I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother, added Elinor; and once or twice I have attempted it; — but without betraying my trust, I never could have convinced you.
Elinor, she cried, you have made me hate myself for ever.