But if she _ did _, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact.
Whatever the truth of it might be, and far as Elinor was from feeling thorough contentment about it, yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could not be very uncomfortable herself.
Do n’t you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor ?
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne persevered, and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching frost.
Pleased to find herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she had expected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.
Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with them almost every day; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor, who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from any other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much concern his continued regard for her sister.
She feared it was a strengthening regard.
It grieved her to see the earnestness with which he often watched Marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse than when at Barton.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those of her sister all, and more than all, their former agitation.
From this moment her mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day, made her unfit for any thing.
She insisted on being left behind, the next morning, when the others went out.
Elinor ’s thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Street during their absence; but a moment ’s glance at her sister when they returned was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid no second visit there.
said Elinor, unable to be longer silent.
Nay, Elinor, this reproach from _ you _ — you who have confidence in no one !
Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she was not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to press for greater openness in Marianne.
The invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew near, necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, that they should both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty in persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen nothing of Willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad, than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.
Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is not materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled in town, Sir John had contrived to collect around him, nearly twenty young people, and to amuse them with a ball.
replied Elinor.
Impatient in this situation to be doing something that might lead to her sister ’s relief, Elinor resolved to write the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fears for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had been so long delayed; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne was again writing to Willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any other person.
About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out by herself on business, and Elinor began her letter directly, while Marianne, too restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating all that had passed, her suspicions of Willoughby ’s inconstancy, urging her by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account of her real situation with respect to him.
Elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her sister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening.
Elinor was not prepared for such a question, and having no answer ready, was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient, of asking what he meant ?
It can not be generally known, returned Elinor, for her own family do not know it.
These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for her sister, affected her very much.
She was not immediately able to say anything, and even when her spirits were recovered, she debated for a short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give.
The real state of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little known to herself, that in endeavouring to explain it, she might be as liable to say too much as too little.
Yet as she was convinced that Marianne ’s affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon ’s success, whatever the event of that affection might be, and at the same time wished to shield her conduct from censure, she thought it most prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say more than she really knew or believed.
She acknowledged, therefore, that though she had never been informed by themselves of the terms on which they stood with each other, of their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of their correspondence she was not astonished to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing to speak, rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion, to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that he may endeavour to deserve her, — took leave, and went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on the contrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon ’s unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.