Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time even after the sound of his carriage had died away, remained too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas, widely differing in themselves, but of which sadness was the general result, to think even of her sister.
Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the most worthless of men, Willoughby, in spite of all his faults, excited a degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which made her think of him as now separated for ever from her family, with a tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledged within herself — to his wishes than to his merits.
She felt that his influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction, that open, affectionate, and lively manner which it was no merit to possess; and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it was not even innocent to indulge.
Elinor could _ not _ remember it; but her mother, without waiting for her assent, continued, And his manners, the Colonel ’s manners are not only more pleasing to me than Willoughby ’s ever were, but they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attaching to Marianne.
Elinor ’s heart was full.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne ’s being no more, had no voice to inquire after her, no voice even for Elinor; but _ she _, waiting neither for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief; and her mother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as much overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.
She was supported into the drawing - room between her daughter and her friend; and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable to speak, embraced Elinor again and again, turning from her at intervals to press Colonel Brandon ’s hand, with a look which spoke at once her gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment.
He shared it, however, in a silence even greater than her own.
Elinor ’s delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep : but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when the life of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowing her mother was near her, and conscious of being too weak for conversation, submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her.
Mrs. Dashwood _ would _ sit up with her all night; and Elinor, in compliance with her mother ’s entreaty, went to bed.
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person, and Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private, to wish success to her friend, and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.
But her promise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful.
She dreaded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be happy with another; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower.
Elinor could not hear the declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimes wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward.
But Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointment which Elinor had sent her, was led away by the exuberance of her joy to think only of what would increase it.
Marianne was restored to her from a danger in which, as she now began to feel, her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby, had contributed to place her; — and in her recovery she had yet another source of joy unthought of by Elinor.
It was thus imparted to her, as soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred.
My Elinor, you do not yet know all my happiness.
You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at your composure now.
He has loved her, my Elinor, ever since the first moment of seeing her.
His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or constant — which ever we are to call it — has subsisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne ’s unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man !
I know it is, — replied her mother seriously, or after such a warning, _ I _ should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be pleased by it.