A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting in rising, confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her bed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings ’s advice, of sending for the Palmers ’ apothecary.
Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclined from the first to think Marianne ’s complaint more serious than Elinor, now looked very grave on Mr. Harris ’s report, and confirming Charlotte ’s fears and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate removal with her infant; and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be withstood.
Mrs. Jennings, however, with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her, declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care, to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from; and Elinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate, desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often by her better experience in nursing, of material use.
The little she said was all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried to raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she _ then _ really believed herself, that it would be a very short one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the patient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was no amendment, did not appear worse.
Elinor, confirmed in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that in her letters to her mother, she had pursued her own judgment rather than her friend ’s, in making very light of the indisposition which delayed them at Cleveland; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be able to travel.
Her sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself, she resolved to sit with her during the whole of it.
Mrs. Jennings, knowing nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early to bed; her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreating herself in the housekeeper ’s room, and Elinor remained alone with Marianne.
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself, and, while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse.
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome.
She thanked him with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr. Harris, and an order for post-horses directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon — or such a companion for her mother, — how gratefully was it felt !
— a companion whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose friendship might soothe her !
— as far as the shock of such a summons _ could _ be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance, would lessen it.
_ He _, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the firmness of a collected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmost despatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which she might look for his return.
The horses arrived, even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage.
It was then about twelve o’clock, and she returned to her sister ’s apartment to wait for the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of the night.
Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne ’s side, and in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor ’s, before Mr. Harris appeared.
Her apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all her former security; and the servant who sat up with her, for she would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured her more, by hints of what her mistress had always thought.
Marianne ’s ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on her mother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifled with so many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief, fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing had been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her suffering mother arriving too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.
She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris, or if _ he _ could not come, for some other advice, when the former — but not till after five o’clock — arrived.
His opinion, however, made some little amends for his delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger to be material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was communicated to Elinor.
He promised to call again in the course of three or four hours, and left both the patient and her anxious attendant more composed than he had found them.
Her former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left her no doubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, her conviction of her sister ’s danger would not allow her to offer the comfort of hope.
Her heart was really grieved.
Elinor, catching all, and more than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to call in further advice.
Elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to her reflections.
About noon, however, she began — but with a caution — a dread of disappointment which for some time kept her silent, even to her friend — to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her sister ’s pulse; — she waited, watched, and examined it again and again; — and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness, than all her foregoing distress, ventured to communicate her hopes.
Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on examination, to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young friend from indulging a thought of its continuance; — and Elinor, conning over every injunction of distrust, told herself likewise not to hope.
Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious flutter, she bent over her sister to watch — she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed her.
Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered Elinor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed her eyes on her with a rational, though languid, gaze.
Elinor could not be cheerful.
Her joy was of a different kind, and led to any thing rather than to gaiety.
All within Elinor ’s breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.
She continued by the side of her sister, with little intermission the whole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost every look and every breath.
The possibility of a relapse would of course, in some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was — but when she saw, on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of recovery continued, and saw Marianne at six o’clock sink into a quiet, steady, and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every doubt.
Mrs. Jennings would have persuaded her, at its conclusion, to take some rest before her mother ’s arrival, and allow _ her _ to take her place by Marianne; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that moment about her, and she was not to be kept away from her sister an unnecessary instant.
The wind roared round the house, and the rain beat against the windows; but Elinor, all happiness within, regarded it not.
Had it been ten, Elinor would have been convinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to the house; and so strong was the persuasion that she _ did _, in spite of the _ almost _ impossibility of their being already come, that she moved into the adjoining dressing - closet and opened a window shutter, to be satisfied of the truth.
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived her.
By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to be drawn by four horses; and this, while it told the excess of her poor mother ’s alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.
Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as at that moment.
The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the carriage stopt at the door — of her doubt — her dread — perhaps her despair !
— and of what _ she _ had to tell !
All that remained to be done was to be speedy; and, therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs. Jennings ’s maid with her sister, she hurried down stairs.