Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward ’s conduct, but only Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit.
cried Elinor; have you been repeating to me what you only learnt yourself by listening at the door ?
Elinor gloried in his integrity; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his punishment.
Elinor avoided it upon principle, as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts, by the too warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward ’s continued affection for herself which she rather wished to do away; and Marianne ’s courage soon failed her, in trying to converse upon a topic which always left her more dissatisfied with herself than ever, by the comparison it necessarily produced between Elinor ’s conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison; but not as her sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now; she felt it with all the pain of continual self - reproach, regretted most bitterly that she had never exerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence, without the hope of amendment.
Her mind was so much weakened that she still fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only dispirited her more.
Such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings, before her company was claimed by Mrs. Richardson; and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time, though she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and foreplanned in her own mind.
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings was eager for information; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, she confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, as she felt assured that Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, would choose to have known.
Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys were again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined them soon after they entered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuing with them, and engaging all Mrs. Jennings ’s conversation, she was herself left to quiet reflection.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor, Get it all out of her, my dear.
It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings ’s curiosity and Elinor ’s too, that she would tell any thing _ without _ being asked; for nothing would otherwise have been learnt.
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two - penny post from Lucy herself.