In the drawing - room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine - glass, full of something, in her hand.
Elinor, for her sister ’s sake, could not press the subject farther, and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby ’s; since, though Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healing powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself as on her sister.
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he was already aware of what occasioned her absence.
Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walked across the room to the tea - table where Elinor presided, and whispered, The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.
Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of her sister, seen a check to all mirth, she could have been entertained by Mrs. Jennings ’s endeavours to cure a disappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and a good fire.
Elinor even advised her against it.
Elinor, pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive, though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner, said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could, while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist her into the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it.
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings ’s kindness, though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments, and returned her those civilities, which her sister could not make or return for herself.
And then rising, she went away to join Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which, till Elinor ’s entrance, had been her only light.
You had better leave me, was all the notice that her sister received from her.
I will leave you, said Elinor, if you will go to bed.
But this, from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first refused to do.
Her sister ’s earnest, though gentle persuasion, however, soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her aching head on the pillow, and as she hoped, in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her.