She was mortified, shocked, confounded.
Marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing like impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference of taste from herself, was at this time particularly ill - disposed, from the state of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to encourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of her behaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself which soon became evident in the manners of both, but especially of Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation, or of striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank communication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just and amusing; and as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable; but her powers had received no aid from education : she was ignorant and illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want of information in the most common particulars, could not be concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to advantage.
Elinor saw, and pitied her for, the neglect of abilities which education might have rendered so respectable; but she saw, with less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions, her assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed; and she could have no lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting in conversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward others made every show of attention and deference towards herself perfectly valueless.
Fortunately for her, they had now reached the cottage, and the conversation could be continued no farther.
Elinor _ did _ think the question a very odd one, and her countenance expressed it, as she answered that she had never seen Mrs. Ferrars.
After sitting with them a few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was then at liberty to think and be wretched.
No, returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward ’s mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity; I know nothing of her.
Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few minutes in silence.
But really I never understood that you were at all connected with that family, and therefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiry into her character.
cried Elinor, what do you mean ?
No, replied Lucy, not to Mr. _ Robert _ Ferrars — I never saw him in my life; but, fixing her eyes upon Elinor, to his eldest brother.
What felt Elinor at that moment ?
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though her complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt in no danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.
Elinor for a few moments remained silent.
Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it.
— Elinor ’s security sunk; but her self - command did not sink with it.
Then taking a small miniature from her pocket, she added, To prevent the possibility of mistake, be so good as to look at this face.
She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor saw the painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision, or her wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind, she could have none of its being Edward ’s face.
She returned it almost instantly, acknowledging the likeness.
As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to discover something in her countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying; but Lucy ’s countenance suffered no change.
Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did not feel very compassionate.
Pardon me, replied Elinor, startled by the question; but I can give you no advice under such circumstances.
No, replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy ’s veracity; I remember he told us, that he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth.
I heard from him just before I left Exeter; taking a letter from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor.
Elinor saw that it _ was _ his hand, and she could doubt no longer.
This picture, she had allowed herself to believe, might have been accidentally obtained; it might not have been Edward ’s gift; but a correspondence between them by letter, could subsist only under a positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing else; for a few moments, she was almost overcome — her heart sunk within her, and she could hardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary; and she struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings, that her success was speedy, and for the time complete.
Yes, _ I _ have one other comfort in his picture, but poor Edward has not even _ that _.