She had not seen him before since his engagement became public, and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness of what she had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted, with a very earnest assurance on _ her _ side of her unceasing good wishes for his happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on _ his _, with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power of expressing it.
— Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming into the room, he could not recollect; but determining to be on the safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he could say any thing, after taking a chair.
When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she returned from seeing people whom she had never seen before, and of whom therefore she must have a great deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by the important secret in her possession, than by anything else, that she reverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared.
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs. Jennings ’s speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore only replied to its conclusion.
Yes, continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of the worst was over, Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his concern for what has lately passed — for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you — a concern which I am sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share; and likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character, and his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion.
Her astonishment and confusion were very great on his so sudden appearance.
For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had ceased to speak; — at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said, Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability.
Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their not waiting for any thing more.
Edward made no answer; but when she had turned away her head, gave her a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the mansion - house much greater.
Elinor had just been congratulating herself, in the midst of her perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herself properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving the information by word of mouth, when her visitor entered, to force her upon this greatest exertion of all.
Elinor told him the number of the house.