But it was neither in Elinor ’s power, nor in her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailed explanation, as had at first been called forth in herself.
Reflection had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby ’s deserts; — she wished, therefore, to declare only the simple truth, and lay open such facts as were really due to his character, without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray.
Elinor ’s heart could easily account for his not putting himself forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the same explanation.
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothing tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to hear her sister ’s unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence.
— For some moments her voice was lost; but recovering herself, she added, and with greater calmness than before — I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change.
I never could have been happy with him, after knowing, as sooner or later I must have known, all this.
I know it — I know it, cried her mother.
Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but Elinor knew better than to expect them.
She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and was very confident that Edward would never come near them.
Elinor looked as if she wished to hear more.
Mrs. Dashwood ’s and Elinor ’s appetites were equally lost, and Margaret might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as they had often had to be careless of their meals, she had never been obliged to go without her dinner before.
When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence.
She now found that she had erred in relying on Elinor ’s representation of herself; and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly softened at the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness, suffering as she then had suffered for Marianne.
She feared that under this persuasion she had been unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to her Elinor; — that Marianne ’s affliction, because more acknowledged, more immediately before her, had too much engrossed her tenderness, and led her away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suffering almost as much, certainly with less self - provocation, and greater fortitude.
Marianne would not let her proceed; — and Elinor, satisfied that each felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that might weaken her sister ’s spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first subject, immediately continued, _ One _ observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the story — that all Willoughby ’s difficulties have arisen from the first offence against virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams.
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three following days, that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done; but while her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried to appear cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon her health.
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving London, nothing new of his plans, nothing certain even of his present abode.
Some letters had passed between her and her brother, in consequence of Marianne ’s illness; and in the first of John ’s, there had been this sentence : — We know nothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiries on so prohibited a subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford; which was all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence, for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.
Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon Elinor, saw her turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose eyes, as she answered the servant ’s inquiry, had intuitively taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor ’s countenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards, alike distressed by Marianne ’s situation, knew not on which child to bestow her principal attention.
By that time, Marianne was rather better, and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an inquiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.
Mrs. Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinor had the benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.