In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; and was even partly determined never to mention the subject again.
Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.
asked Elinor.
Believe me, and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity, nothing could be farther from my intention than to give you such an idea.
Elinor blushed in spite of herself.
Elinor was soon called to the card - table by the conclusion of the first rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two ladies was therefore at an end, to which both of them submitted without any reluctance, for nothing had been said on either side to make them dislike each other less than they had done before; and Elinor sat down to the card table with the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only without affection for the person who was to be his wife; but that he had not even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, which sincere affection on _ her _ side would have given, for self - interest alone could induce a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which she seemed so thoroughly aware that he was weary.
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor, and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it, and was particularly careful to inform her confidante, of her happiness whenever she received a letter from Edward, it was treated by the former with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civility would allow; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion.
No, answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated feelings, on such a subject I certainly will not.
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward ’s future wife, and replied, This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject had I formed one.